---
title: "Emerging role of Geographical Information System (GIS), Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and spatial LCA (GIS-LCA) in sustainable bioenergy planning"
date: 2021-08-22T22:00:18+02:00
description:
images:
- https://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S0960852417303516-gr2.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
thumbnailImage: //ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S0960852417303516-gr2.jpg
tags:
- GIS
- LCA
Categories:
- Research
- Life Cycle Assessment
---
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960852417303516#f0010

## Abstract

Sustainability of a bioenergy project depends on precise assessment of biomass resource, planning of cost-effective logistics and evaluation of possible environmental implications. In this context, this paper reviews the role and applications of geo-spatial tool such as Geographical Information System (GIS) for precise agro-residue resource assessment, biomass logistic and power plant design. Further, application of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) in understanding the potential impact of agro-residue bioenergy generation on different ecosystem services has also been reviewed and limitations associated with LCA variability and uncertainty were discussed. Usefulness of integration of GIS into LCA (i.e. spatial LCA) to overcome the limitations of conventional LCA and to produce a holistic evaluation of the environmental benefits and concerns of bioenergy is also reviewed. Application of GIS, LCA and spatial LCA can help alleviate the challenges faced by ambitious bioenergy projects by addressing both economics and environmental goals.

## Keywords
Geographical Information System; Life Cycle Assessment; spatial LCA; Agro-residue biomass; Bioenergy

## 1. Introduction

GIS and LCA differs from each other in the sense that, the former is used for spatial data acquisition, storage, processing and visualization, while LCA is not, but they are complementary to each other (Gorniak-Zimroz and Pactwa, 2015).

## 2. Application of GIS in agro-residue bioenergy planning

Optimization of the transportation network can significantly reduce the cost of transport. GIS has the capability to model least-cost transport pathway. For example, Network Analyst extension of ArcGIS software can model least-cost transport pathway for delivering biomass feedstock from source to user location.

Another logistic parameter that requires managerial attention is the selection of optimal biomass collection area and power plant site, where multiple factors come into play.

## 5. Uncertainties in bioenergy LCA

The variations may be due to the differences in the type and management of raw materials, conversion technologies, end use technologies and the choice of LCA methodologies (consequential/attributional/hybrid LCA).

## 6. Spatial LCA in bioenergy and environmental planning
