---
title: "Special issue of Euro 2020: England vs Italy"
date: 2021-07-12T09:24:55+02:00
description:
images:
- https://images.hindustantimes.com/img/2021/07/11/1600x900/Italy_Euro_2020_trophy_1626042203830_1626042228590.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
thumbnailImage: //images.hindustantimes.com/img/2021/07/11/1600x900/Italy_Euro_2020_trophy_1626042203830_1626042228590.jpg
tags:
- football
- EURO
Categories:
- Daily English
- Sport
---
### Live blogs

From [MARCE](https://www.marca.com/en/football/uefa-euro/2021/07/11/60eb0cce46163f89168b464a.html) and [EURO 2020 offical](https://www.uefa.com/uefaeuro-2020/match/2024491/).

Minute 1: Kick off in the Euro 2020 final!
Here we go then! In the rainy conditions, Italy vs England kicks off. It's the Euro 2020 final. Let's see who replaces Portugal to become the champions of Europe.

Minute 2: England go ahead already!
England take a very early lead in this Euro 2020 final, launching a counter attack from an Italian corner. It's Kieran Trippier who crosses, for England's opposite wing-back Luke Shaw to volley home past Donnarumma.

Minute 8: Another dangerous Tripper cross
England put together another attack down the right, woth Tripper getting on the ball inside the Italian penalty area. This time, though, Chiellini is able to block and Italy clear the danger away.

Minute 12: Yet another attack through England's right.
Once again, Italy have conceded a chance down their left side and England's right. It really seems they're missing the presence of Leonardo Spinazzola. They need to cover that space.

Minute 20: England look comfortable
Italy are pushing for that equaliser, but England are defending every ball forward well. They're also so precise in their passing, launching counter attacks and keeping the ball away from the Italians.

Minute 24: Problems for Jorginho
There are more problems for Italy as Jorginho has picked up an injury. He goes off for some treatment, but returns to th pitch. It looks like he's going try to shake it off.

Minute 30: Just one shot on target and it was the goal
Half an hour in, we've only had one shot on target from these two sides and it was Shaw's very early goal. England aren't attacking as much, while Italy can't find a way through the home side's back line.

Minute 35: Just wide from Chiesa!
This is the closest Italy have come. Chiesa goes on a solo run and launches a low shot from distance, but it flashes just past Jordan Pickford's post.

Minute 41: England stand firm
Italy have a dangerous freekick, but England manage to clear their lines and then hold the Azzurri at arm's length from the second ball. Southgate's side look like they'll make it to half time with the lead.

Minute 44: Kuipers gives nothing
Both sides are calling for freekicks as the half draws to a close, Kuipers is giving nothing. Not for handball shouts. Not for cries of foul. He even waves at Rice to get up as the England player protests from the floor.

Minute 45: Four minutes of stoppage time
We still have four more minutes of this first half to go, with four minutes of stoppage time announced. It's mostly from the injury suffered by Jorginho.

Minute 45+2: Stones denies Immobile!
Italy create a late chance, with the ball falling perfectly for Immobile. But, John Stones is there to block the effort, before Pickford can grasp a tame follow-up attempt from Verratti.

Half time: England lead thanks to Shaw's early goal.
It was the perfect start to this Euro 2020 final for England, as Luke Shaw scored in just the second minute. Italy haven't been able to break England down since then, so it's still 1-0 at the half time break.

Minute 46: It's the second half of the Euro 2020 final
If they can maintain their lead, England are 45 minutes away from becoming champions of Europe. Here we go, then, for the second half of the Euro 2020 final.

Minute 47: Barella into the book.
It's not a great start to the second 45 minutes for Italy, as Barella is shown a yellow card for a foul on Herry Kane. The striker has been excellent throughout at dropping deep to link up with his teammates.

Minute 48: No penalty for Sterling this time!
England want a penalty as Raheem Sterling hits the deck, but there's no penalty awarded. It's quite similar to the fall against Denmark as the forward goes down in the middle of a defensive sandwich. Kuipers, though, waves play on.

Minute 51: Just over from an Italian freekick
Italy win a free kick in a very dangerous postion, just outside England's penalty area. It's Insigne who takes it, but his curled effort flashes just over Pickford's crossbar. It's still 1-0 to England.

Minute 57: Chances for both sides
Harry Maguire heads over at one end, before Lorenzo Insigne draws a save from Pickford at the other end after doing well to get inside the England penalty area.

Minute 62: Pickford pushes Chiesa's shot away
Italy are really growing into this and they create another chance, with Chiesa again trying his luck. This time his low shot is palmed away by Pickford, a save that looks better and better with every replay.



### After the final

The UK prime minister and the Football Association have condemned racist abuse aimed at England's Jadon Sancho, Marcus Rashford and Bukayo Saka after the Euro 2020 final defeat by Italy.

All three players missed penalties in the 3-2 shootout loss and were targeted on social media after the game.

"This England team deserve to be lauded as heroes, not racially abused on social media. Those responsible for this appalling abuse should be ashamed of themselves." PM said.

> We made some history, but couldn't achieve the one thing we're all dreaming of.
But football is about more than trophies, and we've seen that all summer.
—twitter of England

> I'm disappointed like everyone else is, football can be a cruel, cruel game at times and I've been on the end of it.
Unfortunately these boys will feel so hurt, so angry so disappointed this morning and it will hurt them for a while.
but when you look at the whole picture they should feel proud of what they have given us because they have given us hope, put smiles on our faces and pulled a lot of people together over the past month.
—Alan shearer, former England captain

> England's Euros dream is dashed in penalty shootout.
— Yorkshire Post

> Italy's veteran defenders Leonardo Bonucci and Giorgio Chiellini – who have a combined age of 70 – are waking up European champions.
— twitter of Italy

> It all ends in tears.
— Daily Mail

> Why are we happy with losing? We were negative after 3 minutes and never got their old central defence. This was ours to lose and should never have gone to penalty lottery.
— ZX
