---
title: 30 Tough but Very Important Advanced Verbs for Daily Use
date: 2021-07-21T20:09:18+02:00
description:
images:
- https://englishdanny.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/30-quite-tough-but-very-important-advanced-english-verbs-for-daily-use-WGce2fBK0aM.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
thumbnailImage: //englishdanny.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/30-quite-tough-but-very-important-advanced-english-verbs-for-daily-use-WGce2fBK0aM.jpg
tags:
- Lucy
Categories:
- Daily English
---

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WGce2fBK0aM&t=768s

1. to accomplish
to succeed in doing something, ***especially after trying very hard***
= achieve
Mission accomplished.
Try to accomplish your aim with diligence.

2. to accumulate
to gradually get more and more money, possessions, knowledge etc over a period of time
eg. Capitalism is not just about accumulation.
In everyday English, people usually say **build up** rather than accumulate.

3. to be beware
used to warn someone to be careful because something is dangerous
Beware of the dog!
They should beware of making hasty decisions.

4. to brainstorm
The children start by brainstorming ideas.

5. to characterise
to describe the qualities of someone or something in a particular way.  
= portray

6. to devise
to invent a way of doing something, especially one that is clever or complicated
This system was devised as a way of measuring students’ progress.
Don't worry. I've devised a most elegant solution.

7. to dispute
question whether sth.is true.
> mostly nouns.

Be involved in a dispute with sb.
get into a ~
a bitter/fierce disputes
a long-running disputes
a pay dispute
a political/legal dispute
a domestic dispute
a border/territorial dispute

I reconciled the dispute among the boys.
Negotiators are attempting to settle several disputes.
The firm is involved in a legal dispute with a rival company.

8. to downsize
The airline has downsized its workforce by 30%.
if a company or organization downsizes, it reduces the number of people it employs in order to reduce costs.

9. to embrace
to accept an idea/proposal
formal to eagerly accept a new idea, opinion, religion etc
That's your big solution -- embrace ignorance?
Most people her age don't embrace technology.

10. to endorse
to express formal support or approval for someone or something
endorse a proposal/an idea/a candidate etc
The application was endorsed by the governors' board.
McCain has endorsed Trump for president.
The candidates competed for the union's endorsement.

11. to fiddle
to change the details to get money
Bert had been fiddling his income tax for years.

12. to idolise
to love and admire sb. very much
He idolised his brother.
Jane grew up idolizing Princess Diana.

13. to implement
to take action or make changes
A nine year compulsory education is implemented in China.
By 2025, it will surely be implemented.

14. to instigate
cause sth. happen, persuade someone to do sth. bad or violent.
Whom, I might add, instigated the whole thing.
Why do we assume she instigated the relationships?

15. to melt
make sth. liquid

16. to moan
My mum never stops moaning at me.
He moaned and groaned all the way there.

17. to negotiate

18. to outweight
greater or  than sth.

19. to overtake
to become greater in no. or importance

20. to perceive
understand in a particular always
21. to plummet

22. to praise
approve of or admire sb. or sth.

23. to prosper

to develope in a a successful way.

24. to rectify
to correct or to
25. to redeem
to exchange sth. for money.
26. to retain

27. to sacrifice
give up sth. that is imp to you

28. to season
to add salt.. to make it better

29. to sip

30. to withdraw
