---
title: "Features of Chinese Food"
date: 2021-11-12T16:14:23+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- Food
tags:
- Chinese food
keywords:
- tech
coverImage: https://www.thespruceeats.com/thmb/HN6VkV4-erudCbqh3wHuxi414xE=/1885x1414/smart/filters:no_upscale()/GettyImages-545285962-5ad89accae9ab800380ec5a2.jpg
coverSize: full
coverMeta: out
thumbnailImage: https://www.thespruceeats.com/thmb/HN6VkV4-erudCbqh3wHuxi414xE=/1885x1414/smart/filters:no_upscale()/GettyImages-545285962-5ad89accae9ab800380ec5a2.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
Chinese food, rich and colorful, has diversified color, aromatic flavor, and excellent taste as its main features. With these three characteristics, it is not only tasty but also a work of art for people to appreciate.
<!--more-->
To make real Chinese dishes, none of the three characteristics - color, aroma and delicious taste should be excluded.

{{< toc >}}

# Diverse Colors

{{< hl-text orange>}}Dishes with diverse color can usually greatly arouse people's appetite{{< /hl-text >}}. For many years, Chinese food preparation has paid attention to {{< hl-text orange>}}aesthetic appearance{{< /hl-text >}}. To have {{< hl-text orange>}}a bright, pleased and harmonious color{{< /hl-text >}} is one of the main principles when cooking dishes. To achieve this, add two or three ingredients with different colors are added {{< hl-text orange>}}as decoration to complement the main ingredient.{{< /hl-text >}} Thus, it is not only the taste of the dishes that makes you amazed but also its aesthetic value.

# Aromatic Flavor

The aroma of the dish is very important. Usually **aniseed**, Chinese prickly ash **seeds**, **cinnamon** and other spices are added to help cover the ingredients' particular smells, such as foul, fishy and mutton smells. {{< hl-text orange>}}Also some other flavors like **spring onion**, **ginger**, **garlic** or **chili**, **cooking wine** and **sesame oil** are added to make the dishes fragrant in flavor.{{< /hl-text >}}

# Excellent Taste

Regarded as the soul of the Chinese dish, taste can be divided into {{< hl-text orange>}}five classes - sweet, sour, bitter, hot and salty.{{< /hl-text >}} Seasoning such as **soy sauce**, **sugar**, **vinegar** and **salt** {{< hl-text orange>}}in proper amount{{< /hl-text >}} and {{< hl-text orange>}}in different sequences{{< /hl-text >}}, contribute to the taste of the dish. In the vast land of China, there are eating habits of 'South-Sweet, North-Salty, East-Hot and West-Sour' according to the different tastes of the people. Those in southern China like to add more sugar when cooking than others. {{< hl-text orange>}}Jiangsu Cuisine one of the 'Eight Cuisines' is representative of 'South-Sweet'.{{< /hl-text >}} {{< hl-text orange>}}Shandong Cuisine features more salt{{< /hl-text >}} and people living in Hunan, Gubei, Jiangxi, Guizhou, Sichuan like chili best. Sour flavor is favored by Shanxi, Fujian, Guangxi people and the northeasterners.

# Traditional cooking ways
## 1. Stir-frying

Perhaps the most common method of Chinese cooking is stir-frying. A quick and simple method, {{< hl-text orange>}}all you have to do is put the ingredients in a wok and cook on high heat for a short period of time.{{< /hl-text >}} Due to the **short cooking time**, vegetables and other ingredients will keep most of their **nutrients**, and stir-fried meat is often **juicy** and **tasty**.

## 2. Steaming
Steaming is a method of cooking using steam. It is considered to be the healthiest cooking way.

Invented in China, steaming is widely used for buns and dumplings. The process of this cooking style involves putting ingredients in a **steamer basket** which is placed over water in a **steamer pot**. {{< hl-text orange>}}Steaming can hold more of the nutrition contained in food compared to boiling because the water doesn’t absorb them.{{< /hl-text >}} Furthermore, {{< hl-text orange>}}less seasoning is used{{< /hl-text >}}, and very little oil is required, so {{< hl-text orange>}}the foods natural flavour is maintained{{< /hl-text >}}. **Bamboo steamers** are commonly used by the locals, which are stacked upon one another, allowing for an array of food to be cooked at once. Dishes that require the longest cooking time are placed at the bottom so that they are near the hottest part. Furthermore, the most well-known dishes that are steamed are **dim sum**, **dumplings**, **buns** and **fish**.

## 3. Braising/stewing /breɪz/ /stjuː/

Cooking meat and vegetables slowly in liquid for a long time.

A method that is slightly more **time-consuming** is braising; however, it is certainly worth putting in the effort. {{< hl-text orange>}}The technique involves adding seasoning and ingredients to a small amount of water or broth to either a wok or saucepan, then boiling it together at a high temperature. Afterwards, you simmer at low heat for around one hour or longer.{{< /hl-text >}} Once braised, you can cut the ingredients into large cubes and serve. Braised chicken with mushrooms or braised beef with potatoes are perhaps the most well-known dishes cooked in this way.
