---
title: "10 Synonyms and confusable words 1"
date: 2021-12-27T18:52:44+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- Collocations in Use
keywords:
- tech
thumbnailImage: https://cdn.kobisi.com/cdn/image/3826/4840280/1/1200/1200/english-collocations-in-use-intermediate-book-with-answers.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
# A Common synonym pairs

The (a) and (b) words in each pair in the table have similar meanings. Sometimes either word can be used in a sentence to give the same meaning, but in the collocations below only one word is possible.

(a) close
The chairperson **closed the meeting** at 4.30. [We **close meetings/discussions/conferences**, etc.]
(b) shut
She was very rude. She said ‘Shut your mouth!’ [impolite way of telling someone not to speak] A dentist might ask you to close your mouth. Shut is generally more informal.

(a) start
It was a cold morning and I could not **start my car**. [Start, NOT begin, is used for engines and vehicles.]
(b) begin
Before **the universe began**, time and space did not exist. [Begin is preferred in more formal and abstract contexts.]

(a) big
It was a **big decision** to make.
There were some **big problems** to solve.
(b) large
I wanted the sweater in the **large size** but they only had medium.

(a) end
The **film ended with** the hero dying.
They **ended their relationship** a year ago. [End here means decide to stop.]
(b) finish
I haven’t **finished my homework** yet. [Finish here means complete.]

# B Groups of words with similar meanings

**Words meaning ‘old’**
I met an **old friend** the other day. It’s a very **old building**.
She studied **ancient history**. In **ancient times**, life was very hard.
This shop sells **antique furniture**. She collects **antique jewellery**. [old and valuable]
I helped an **elderly person** who was trying to cross the road. [***elderly is more polite than old***]

**Words meaning ‘with no one or nothing else or with nothing similar’**
Donna is **a single parent**; it’s difficult for her to work full time.
He lives in a very **lonely place/spot** up in the mountains.
At first I felt **desperately lonely** when I moved from London to the countryside.
I **live alone**, but I don’t like **travelling alone**; it’s nice to be with someone.
There was just one **solitary figure** /'sɒlɪt(ə)rɪ/ on the otherwise deserted beach. [one person on their own, 孤独的身影]
She was the **sole survivor** of the crash. Everyone else died. [only survivor]
I am an **only child**; I sometimes wonder what it would be like to have a brother or sister.
This is a **unique occasion**, with three past Prime Ministers all together in one room.

# C Other synonym pairs

(a) charge
I need to charge my phone. [used for batteries, electrical items]
(b) load
They loaded the lorry and drove away. [used for cargoes, lorries, vans, ships, etc. and for weapons]

(a) injure
Three injured people were taken to hospital after the accident. [collocates with words to do with people]
(b) damage
The shop tried to sell me a damaged sofa but I noticed it just in time. [collocates with words for things]

(a) grow
In the south the farmers grow crops. [collocates with crops, plants]
(b) raise
In the north the farmers mostly raise cattle. [collocates with animals, children]

# Exercises
## Choose the correct collocation.
1. The dentist told me to shut / **close** my mouth.
2. I didn’t know what to do when I got into my car and couldn’t **start** / begin the engine.
3. I want to buy a sweater for my dad. He needs one in a big / **large** size.
4. I haven’t **finished** / ended my essay yet. I can’t decide how to finish / end it.
5. At what time do you plan to shut / **close** the conference?
6. All societies develop their own stories about how the world started / **began**.
7. It’s far too **big** / large a problem for you to solve on your own.
8. It’s never easy to finish / **end**a relationship.
## Look at B. Complete each phrase with a word meaning either ‘old’ or ‘alone’.
1 a  **solitary** figure on the horizon
6 to live **alone**
2 a shop selling **antique** furniture
7 to feel desperately **lonely**
3 to be an **only** child
8 to catch up with **old** friends
4 the **sole** survivor of the accident
9 support for **single** parents
5 to study **ancient** history
10 a home for **elderly** people
## Correct these sentences.
1 Were many people damaged/**injured** in the earthquake?
2 Single parents who are growing/**raising** children without a partner’s support are entitled to financial help from the government.
3 My mobile isn’t working. I need to load/**charge** the battery.
4 She has a lot of beautiful elderly/**antique** jewellery.
5 When we moved house, two men helped us to charge/**load** the van.
6 That’s not news – it’s antique/**old** history!
7 I don’t know how to charge/**load** a gun, let alone fire one.
8 I’ve never been very successful at raising/**growing** plants.
## Which of the collocations on the opposite page do these pictures illustrate?
1. load the ships/cargoes
2. charge the battery
3. raise the sheep
4. grow the plant
5. damaged chair
6. injured leg
