---
title: "11 Synonyms and confusable words 2"
date: 2021-12-28T20:08:46+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- Collocations in Use
thumbnailImage: https://cdn.kobisi.com/cdn/image/3826/4840280/1/1200/1200/english-collocations-in-use-intermediate-book-with-answers.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---

<!--more-->

{{< toc >}}
# A Verbs connected with gaining, winning and achieving
gain
collocates with power, control, and access. E.g. The Socialist Party **gained control** of the National Assembly. (Gain is ofen used with abstract nouns relating to political authority.)

gain (formal)
with a reputation, publicity, recognition and an advantage. E.g. Her paintings **gained recognition** thanks to a major exhibition in New York. (Gain is often used with abstract nouns that suggest benefit to the 'gainer')

Win
With an award, a prize a medal and a match. E.g. He **won a medal** in th 2016 Olympic Games. (Win is often used in contexts associated with competition.)

Win
With a battle, a war, and an election. E.g. The Conservative Party **won the** 2015 General **Election**. (Win is often used in contexts associated with fighting.)

Earn
With a salary and money. E.g. I **earn $2110** a month. (You earn money by working for it.)

Make
With a profit and money. E.g. The company **made a profit** last year. (You can make money by investing ect., not just by working.)

Achieve
With success, your goals and your aims. E.g. It's difficult to **achieve success** in international sport.  (Achieve is used mainly with abstract nouns.)

Beat/defeat
With a team and an opponent. E.g. He **defeated his opponent** in the tennis final. (You win a match but beat/defeat an opponent. Defeat is more formal than beat.)

# B Other word that often confused
You'll need to take warm clothes when you go to Alaska. (not carry)
I always carry my mobile phone whenever I go out. (not wear)
She was waring a hat. (not carrying)
He kindly offered to carry my bag for me.
She's waring a dress.
He's using a laptop.

**Common mistakes**
Notice how spend is used when talking about time and money.
We **spent three days** in the mountains. It was wonderful. (not passed)
If you buy a big car you'll have to **spend more money** on petrol. (not stayed)
Last night I **spent two hours** watching TV. (not stayed)
I **spent an hour** looking for the keys before I found them in my bags. (not passed)
