---
title: "Top 50 Grammar Mistakes"
date: 2021-12-26T21:32:03+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- English Grammar in Use
keywords:
- tech
thumbnailImage: https://media.s-bol.com/R2YmOZVRXNq/537x840.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
Adrian Wallwork, 201, Springer
<!--more-->
1) the first subsection shows some typical mistakes. All sentences in italics are mistakes.
2) In the second subsection correct examples are given of the key words used in typical situations. Correct examples are shown in a box with a grey background.
{{< toc >}}

# 1 Advise, Recommend, Suggest
# 2 Allow, Enable, Permit, Let
# 3 Already, Just, Still, Yet
# 4 Articles: A, An
# 5 Articles: A / An vs One vs It vs Genitive
# 6 Articles: The vs Zero Article (Ø)
# 7 Be Able, Manage vs Can / Could
# 8 Be Born, Die
# 9 Be Going To
# 10 Be vs Have
# 11 Be vs Have as Auxiliary Verbs
# 12 Been vs Gone
# 13 Can vs May
# 14 Cannot vs May Not
# 15 Collective Nouns
# 16 Comparisons  
# 17 Conditionals: Zero and First (If vs When)
# 18 Conditionals: Second and Third
# 19 Continuous Forms
# 20 Countable and Uncountable Nouns
# 21 Each, Every, All, None
# 22 Few, Little, A Few, A Little
# 23 (This Is The) First Time, Second Time
# 24 Genitive: The Possessive Form of Nouns
# 25 Have, Have Got
# 26 Have Something Done

*I am not going to make cut my hair by my mum.*
I am not going to **have my hair cut** by my mum.
*She is having her house to paint next week.*
She is **having her house painted** next week.
*Do you make clean your house by an outside service?*
Do you **have your house cleaned** by an outside service?
*I am having done my nails tomorrow.*
I am **having my nails done tomorrow**.
*I am getting a lifting to my face.*
I am going to **get a facelift**.

* They are having their house renovated.
* I had / I got my hair cut yesterday.
* We are having someone paint the living room for us.
* She is having her tonsils removed.
* I finally got her to tell the truth.

Guidelines
* to have / get something done (have / get + service + past participle) means to
have a service carried out for you by someone else
* to have someone **do** something (have + person + infinitive + service) is
another way of saying to have something done
* to get someone to do something means the same as to have someone do
something, but note that to get requires the infinitive with to
* don’t confuse to have someone do something with to make someone do something. to make means to force / oblige. Thus, I made him clean the house means that I forced him to clean the house against probably against his will

Choose the correct form

1. She is having an online service to write / ***write*** an essay for her.
2. She’s ***getting*** / letting someone do / ***to do*** the gardening for her - she’s so lazy.
3. I am having my car to fix / ***fixed*** next week.
4. She is having dyed her hair / ***her hair dyed*** at the hairdresser’s.
5. The company are having built / ***building*** a new office.
6. They are having the office ***built*** / building by a construction company.
7. They get all their printing to do / ***done*** externally.
8. I’ll get / ***have*** my secretary do the photocopies.
9. I’ll ***get*** / have my husband to give you a call.
10. Are you doing the painting yourself or are you having done the painting / ***the
painting done*** for you?

# 27 How Long, How Much Time, How Many Times

*How long time do you live here?*
How long have you been living here?
*From how much time have you been working for yourself?*
How long have you been working for yourself?
*How much time have you seen this movie?*
How many times have you seen this movie?
*How time do we have to do this exercise?*
How much time do we have to do this exercise?
Who knows how long she is crying.
*Who knows how long she has been crying.*

**How long have you been living in London?**
**How long will you be staying here?**
**How many times have you been to New York? I have been to New York six times.**
**How much time do we have available? Just a couple of hours.**

Guidelines
* Use how long to find out the duration of a particular activity. Note: how long is found with the present perfect (continuous) when it refers to an action that began in the past and is still true today. Example: How long have you been studying / have you studied English? (implies that you are still studying English now). When used with the simple past, how long refers to a completed action. Example: How long did your first marriage last? (implies that your first marriage is over / finished).
* how long can also be used with reference to the future. In any case, the form how long time does not exist.
* how many times is used to find out the number of times someone has done a particular activity. Note the concordance in the use of the plural forms - many + -s (times).
* the word time in how much time, refers to ***minutes, hours, days, etc***.

Choose the correct form
1. How time / **much time** are you planning to stay here?
2. How **many times** / much time do you have to ring the bell before they answer?
3. How long do you work / **have you been working here?**
4. How long time / **long** are you here for? I am leaving the day after tomorrow.
5. How many times / **much time** do you think it will take to complete this
exercise?
6. **How many times** / much time do you think you will need to practise this piece
before you can do it perfectly?

# 28 -ing Form vs the Infinitive
# 29 Languages and Nationalities

English is a relatively easy language.
For some people, the English spoken in the UK is more pure than the English
spoken in the US.(这群人)
The English are a conservative race.(这群人)
He comes from Wales, he is Welsh, he speaks Welsh. The Welsh are very
patriotic.
I met an Italian, two Americans, many Albanians and several Chinese people.

Nationalities that end in -ese, -ss and -h do not have a plural form. So instead
of saying two 'Chineses' you have to say two Chinese people (or two Chinese
men / women / children etc). Likewise, although you can say Italians /
Americans love pasta you cannot say English love pasta, instead say The
English / The Swiss / The Portuguese love pasta or alternatively English people
/ Swiss people / Portuguese people love pasta.

# 30 Like, Love, Prefer
# 31 Make vs Let
# 32 Much, Many, A Lot of, Lots of
# 33 Must vs Have To

*Must* is used much less frequently than to *have to*. It is used when an authority gives a ‘subordinate’/sə'bɔːdɪnət/(下属) an order (e.g. police officer to citizen, parent to child) - such situations are rare. It is also used to give a very strong recommendation or when there is a real emergency / urgency. Examples: You must go and see that movie – you would love it. Doctor, you must come immediately. I really must answer her email otherwise I might lose a great opportunity.

# 34 Must Not Vs Do Not Have To
# 35 Numbers, Dates and Measurements
# 36 Passive vs Active
# 37 People vs Person; Men, Human
# 38 Present Perfect vs Past Simple
# 39 Present Perfect With For and Since
# 40 Pronouns
# 41 So, Too, Very, That + Adjective
# 42 So, Such, So Many, So Much
# 43 Some, Any and Related Issues
# 44 Stop, Remember
# 45 Used To and Present Tense
# 46 Very Much, A Lot: Use at the End of a Phrase
# 47 Want, Would, Would Like, Would Prefer
# 48 Which? What? How?
# 49 Who, Which and What in Questions
# 50 Will vs Present Simple
# Revision Tests 1
# Revision Tests 2
# Appendix
# Index
