---
title: "15 Countryside"
date: 2022-01-11T21:13:45+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- Collocations in Use
thumbnailImage: https://cdn.kobisi.com/cdn/image/3826/4840280/1/1200/1200/english-collocations-in-use-intermediate-book-with-answers.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}

# A Writing about the landscape

From my room I look out over the surrounding countryside. It’s very different from the familiar landscape I see from the windows at home. At home it’s a **gentle landscape**$^{1}$ with open fields$^{2}$. Here it’s a bleak landscape with rocky mountains in the distance.

1 a landscape with nothing extreme or threatening about it
2 fields uninterrupted by woods or houses

Yesterday we followed a path down to the lake. As we turned a corner, we caught a glimpse of$^{3}$ a king fisher standing in the water. John tried to take a picture$^{4}$ of it but it caught sight of us and flew off. A little further on we rounded a bend$^{5}$ and St John’s Abbey came into view. The Abbey fell into ruin$^{6}$ about three hundred years ago. Although it lies in ruins, it is well worth seeing as it stands in a dramatic setting on a steep slope beside a fast-flowing river with
mountains towering$^{7}$ above it.

3 saw for a moment 5 turned a corner 7 mountains rising dramatically
4 take a photo 6 became a ruin

The cottage is in some wonderful unspoilt countryside$^{8}$ on the edge of a dense forest$^{9}$. Unfortunately the trees block the view of the snow-covered mountains. It has a little garden with a stream at the end of it. The stream winds$^{10}$ through the forest. They wanted to build a timber factory here but the local people said that it would destroy the countryside and, fortunately, their campaign to protect the environment succeeded.

8 countryside that has not been changed by industry or modern buildings 9 thick forest 10 makes lots of bends, doesn’t flow in a straight line

# B The language of tourism
collocation and example
* uninterrupted view
From most rooms there are uninterrupted views of the castle.
[nothing blocks the views of the castle]
* panoramic view /ˌpænəˈræmɪk/
From the top floor restaurant diners have a panoramic view of the countryside. [view over a very wide area]
* spectacular view
From the balcony there is a spectacular view of the mountains.
[very dramatic view]
* enjoy/admire a view
We stopped for a few minutes to admire the view.
* breathtaking scenery 景色令人叹为观止
The area has some breathtaking scenery – mountains, cliffs, lakes. [extremely striking and beautiful views]
* dominate the landscape
The castle dominates the landscape for miles around. [can be seen from a long way away]
* beach stretches
A beautiful beach stretches for miles along the coast.
* sandy beach
The hotel has its own sandy beach.
* secluded beach
You’ll love the secluded beaches. [without many people]
* golden sand**s**
You can wander for miles along the golden sands.
* peaceful/tranquil countryside /ˈtræŋkwəl/
You can quickly go from the hustle and bustle of the town to the tranquil countryside. [formal]
