---
date: 2022-01-15T03:59:50+01:00
title: "Flavorful Origins: Gansu Tu Dou"
categories:
- Daily English
- Spoken English
tags:
- Netflix
- subtitles
keywords:
- tech
coverImage: https://cp1.douguo.com/upload/caiku/0/9/e/yuan_090186c91edf52f508e29cd2061d32ae.jpg
coverSize: partial
coverMeta: out
metaAlignment: left
thumbnailImage: https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcTRZVLueLiQFOtjEqguck4GP9QsdUuxVhpEvgIHjFXVYa1MINCN
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
[intro theme playing]
POTATO
[instrumental music playing]
ANDING DISTRICT, DINGXI, GANSU
[narrator] Dingxi, which is locatedin the Loess Plateau,
is dry all year round.
Rainwater is very precious.
Even if they have tap water,this kind of cellar for rainwater
is still preserved in each household.
Zhang Zehan is no an exception.
With a complicated terrainthey're extremely lacking in water,
Dingxi isn't the ideal place for planting grains.
However, relatively concentrated rainfalland sandy soil
happen to be suitable for root crop's growth.
Because of that,the people here have an important food
for survival and settlement.
Potatoes.
Locals call them yangyudan.
Dingxiis one of the most importantpotato production areas in China.
There are over 30 varieties,with different shapes and colors.
Their tastes are also different.
STEAMED PURPLE POTATO
The locals' favorite variantis called xindaping.
Almost not planted anywhere else.
It's big and plump with shiny skinand of the same shape.
Compared with other potato varieties,xindaping's starch content is higher.
After boiling, its surface cracks.
A cracked potatois the most visual way the locals use
to judge the potato's quality.
Potato harvestwould last for the whole day.
Lunch needs to be eaten in the field.
Zhang Zehan digs the soil,and piles blocks of stones.
This kind of oven made from soilis called a ground oven.
Fresh potatoes are roasted on the spot,simple and quick.
Two kilometers from here,
his wife is also makinga common household dish.
The high heat releases a fragrant aroma.
Add hand-pulled noodles and stir-fry itto remove the moisture.
Potatoes that are soft and deliciouscover the noodles.
It has a simple and firm texturein your mouth, warm and sticky.
POTATO BRAISED NOODLES
Four hundred years ago,the potato was introduced to China.
You can eat it as your main course,and it can quickly make you feel full.
It can also be a side ingredientto complement another food's flavor.
It can act as the rice or the dishto your meal
allowing potatoes to be used widelyin Chinese recipes.
COLD POTATO SLICES
In Dingxi,there's a local specialty snack.
After pounding for a thousand times,
the amylopectin in potatoesis fully extended,
and looks as denseand elastic as rice cakes.
STICKY MASHED POTATO
His wife brings the lunch she preparedto the field.
The potatoes roasting in the ground ovenare about to be ready as well.
[fire crackling]
After three hours of roasting,the moisture in the potatoes evaporates.
Under its tight skin,starch granules expand.
The browning of the skinlets its aroma accumulate inside.
[shouting in Mandarin]
[man] The potatoes are ready.We can eat them now.
Success!
[narrator] With the soil's heat and aroma,the roasted potatoes have skins
that are dry and thin.
Lightly break them open.
They're clear and bright inside.
It feels soft with slightly sweetand nice grains inside.
GROUND OVEN ROASTED POTATOES
[indistinct speech and laughter]
Potatoes:The most widely grown crop in the world.
For thousands of years,it continuously changes how people live.
In Dingxi, not only does it provide a stable income for farmers,
but it also accompaniestheir three meals per day
with its simple flavor.
Of course, the people of Gansu aren't satisfied
with simply just cooking potatoes.
They have a more intricate processing method.
Extracting starch from the tubers
is the start of the potatoes'grand transformation.
Ma Nuhai's family knows the technique to do it.
Add boiled water and form them into dough.
Repeated manual kneading is required.
The dough's texturebecomes more and more even.
The starch moleculesgradually connect together
and form a stable, smooth, and sticky texture.
-[man] All right.-We can make thin ones too.
[man] Thin ones or leek-sized?
[narrator] The special wooden scoop
would decide the size and shapeof the food.
The dough absorbs energyfrom the force of the palm,
charges out of the scoop's holes,and falls down.
In the nearly boiling water,
in less than half a minute,it can be cooked and form its shape.
Swiftly lower its temperature.
The cold water washes away excess starch.
The clean and moist noodlesare springy and chewy.
Potato noodles have a mild aroma,yet through its many possibilities,
it wins the hearts of many people.
Simmer it in a clear broth.
It's mildlysweet and smooth to the taste.
Stir-fry on high heat.
It's savory and aromatic.
STIR-FRIED POTATO NOODLES WITH PORK
Two-finger-wide fresh potato noodlesare the most popular.
Stew in a special base,
and springy, chewy noodles are envelopedby a thick, hot, and spicy flavor,
strong and unrestrained.
WIDE POTATO NOODLES IN HOT SAUCE
Not only are potato noodles delicious,but they also signify the wisdom
of the people of Gansu's wayof storing food.
It's almost winter.
The sturdy root and stembelow the dark soil
transform into something clearunder the sun.
Potatoes.
Use their strong vitalityand try their best to provide food
for the people above the ground.
[instrumental music fades out]
[end theme playing]
