---
title: "12 Metaphor"
date: 2021-12-28T20:08:46+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- Collocations in Use
thumbnailImage: https://cdn.kobisi.com/cdn/image/3826/4840280/1/1200/1200/english-collocations-in-use-intermediate-book-with-answers.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---

<!--more-->

{{< toc >}}

If someone uses a metaphor, they use a word in a way that is slightly different from its basic meaning. For example, the first meaning of sunny is connected with the weather, so we talk about a sunny day. However, sunny can also be used in expressions like a sunny smile, the children’s sunny faces to mean happy; in these collocations sunny is used in a metaphorical way. Metaphors are more common in written than spoken English and often have the effect of sounding quite poetic.

# A Light and dark

Light in English is associated with happiness. So a **face shines** with pleasure and **eyes shine** with excitement or delight. If someone’s **face lights up** or their **eyes light up**, they show that they suddenly feel happy. If an **atmosphere lightens** or a **mood lightens**, it becomes more relaxed or cheerful than it was.

* His eyes lit up with laughter. 他笑得两眼放光。
* Her face lit up with pleasure. 她高兴得满面春风。
* Nora didn’t respond to my attempts to lighten the conversation. 我努力让谈话变得轻松一点，可诺拉却没有反应。

Darkness is associated with unhappiness and negative feelings. **Dark thoughts** are gloomy or sinister /'sɪnɪstə/ ones and dark days or dark times are unpleasant times to live through. If someone’s **face darkens** or their **eyes darken** or someone’s **expression darkens**, then we know that that person is unhappy, often because they are feeling angry.

# B Water
Collocation/Example/Comment
**ideas flow, conversation flows**
It was a very successful meeting. The ideas flowed.
Flow suggests that things progress easily, without effort.

**a flood / floods of tears, tears streaming down someone’s face**
The little girl was in floods of tears. Tears were streaming down her face.
Both of these metaphors about tears suggest the girl is crying a lot.

**people pour/stream somewhere**
People poured out of the hall at the end of the lecture.
Pour and stream suggest lots of people moving smoothly.

**people trickle**
People trickled into the concert hall.
Trickle suggests a few people moving slowly.

**a stream of visitors/traffic**
There was a stream of traffic outside our room all night.
Stream suggests continuous movement.

# Fire and heat
Words associated with fire and heat often suggest anger in English. A **heated debate**, a **heated discussion** or a **heated conversation** is one in which people disagree in an angry way with each other. If you say that someone has a **fiery temper**, you mean that they often get suddenly angry.
The word flare means show a bright light in the dark. If you say **tempers flared**, you mean that people became angry with each other. Similarly **violence flares up** and **troubles flare up**. These all mean that problems which existed in the past suddenly become serious again.

However, not all metaphors relating to fire suggest anger. If you feel very embarrassed, your **cheeks burn with embarrassment**. A blaze is a very bright fire. We talk about **a blaze of glory** or **a blaze of publicity** meaning there is a lot of it and it is spectacular.
e.g. He was arrested in a blaze of publicity.
他在铺天盖地的报道中被捕。

Tip
When you are reading English, try to notice metaphorical uses of language. This will help you to see how familiar words can be used in extra, interesting ways.
