---
title: "14 Travel"
date: 2022-01-05T22:52:02+01:00
categories:
- Daily English
- Collocations in Use
thumbnailImage: https://cdn.kobisi.com/cdn/image/3826/4840280/1/1200/1200/english-collocations-in-use-intermediate-book-with-answers.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
# A Travel, journey, trip
Look at these emails and note the different collocations for travel, journey and trip.

Clara,
Have you made your **travel arrangements** for the sales conference yet? If you want a good **travel agent**, I can recommend Atlas World. They specialise in business travel. Their number is 2587996. They’re very helpful.
Noah

Hi Natalie,
I know next week is a business trip, but you must do some sightseeing too. I suggest we take a day trip to Canamuca. It’s about two hours by car, and we can take a boat trip to the island and have lunch there. Looking forward to seeing you. **Safe journey**.
David

Hi Mia,
I’m finally here after an extremely **tiring journey**! The flight was three hours late, they lost my luggage, then there were no taxis at the airport. I hope my **return journey** is better! I’m at the Hotel Rex, room 1305, tel: 987745.
Give me a call.
Miles

Nora,
I got some **travel brochures** with details of camping trips. Want to meet for lunch to look at them? One of them is in Chile, but it’s a long **overnight journey** from the capital to get there, so maybe we should look nearer home?
Lorna

# B Flights

These collocations are all rather formal ones connected with flying:
Palair offers excellent **in-flight entertainment**, with the latest films and music.
The **in-flight magazine** includes maps and information about major airports.
[announcement by a cabin attendant] Ladies and gentlemen, we’ll shortly be landing at Dublin Airport. Please **fasten your seatbelts**.
The passenger **boarded the plane** on time, but it was delayed taking off and she missed her **connecting flight** in Amsterdam.
**Domestic flights** are often more expensive than  international ones. [flights within a country]
Do you normally prefer a **window seat** or an **aisle seat** when you fly?
We managed to get a charter flight[^1]; it was half the price of the scheduled flight[^2].
The weather en route is fine, and we anticipate a **smooth flight**[^3]
to Stockholm today.
[^1]: flight on a plane rented for special use
[^2]: regular flight organised by the company which owns the plane
[^3]: The opposite is a **bumpy flight**.

# C Accommodation
We stayed in a small, **family-run** hotel.
The Panorama is a rather **run-down hotel** in a back street near the city centre.
The Palace is a **luxury hotel** on the main square of Porto Alegre.
I can’t afford to stay in **smart hotels**. I always have to look for **budget accommodation**. [very cheap]
I’d advise you to **make a reservation** before you go. The hotels near the beach are very popular and get **fully booked** during the summer.
