---
date: 2022-01-15T01:59:28+01:00
title: "Flavorful Origins: Yunnan Hardy Banana"
categories:
- Daily English
- Spoken English
tags:
- Netflix
- subtitles
keywords:
- tech
coverImage: http://puui.qpic.cn/vpic/0/w0032wd99gq_1280_720_6.jpg/0
coverSize: partial
coverMeta: out
metaAlignment: left
thumbnailImage: https://m.media-amazon.com/images/M/MV5BZTU0NDg2YzItZTU0YS00MTEwLTk2OTctNWYwMmY1YjEzZjBjXkEyXkFqcGdeQXVyODYyNTM1Nzk@._V1_.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
[narrator] With the waxy surface...
[light music]
a lusciously juicy rootstock...
and small, delicate flowers.
[narrator] This plant native to Yunnan
has been utilized to the fullestby the local inhabitants.
Yunnan's average climatethroughout the year
is around 20 degrees Celsius.
And 90 percent of its land is mountainous.
[light music]
[narrator] This provides an ideal habitatfor plants to grow.
[quirky music]
[narrator] Musa bananas are relatedto regular bananas.
In Yunnan, other than eating them raw,
there are various waysto utilize them as well.
Wrapping them with glutinous riceand steaming them in white sugar
is known as the Banana Babato the Mang City,
Dehong prefecture's inhabitants.
HARDY BANANA BABA
[woman laughing]
[narrator] In a Yunnan menu,
the Musa banana's fruitis only a primary ingredient.
But other parts of the Musa banana plant
are where someof its best tastes come from.
YUNNAN MANGSHI, MANGBANG VILLAGE
YUE BAOXIAN
[narrator] At the start of the New Year,
Yue Baoxian brings out a special tool
to welcome a delicious flavorthat she's been expecting for six months.
[light music]
A Musa banana plant only grows one flower.
When some of the floretsstart developing bananas,
the other florets will stop growing.
Removing the flower at this exact moment
allows the Musa banana to fully develop,
and the flower itselfis also a flavorful ingredient.
[rasping]
[thuds]
[indistinct chatter]
[narrator] In Yunnan,most flowers can be made into dishes.
Palm tree flowerscan be cut up and stir-fried
providing a crunchyand refreshing sweetness.
[light music]
[narrator] Florets of the shangjian plantcan be stir-fried.
It's soft and dulcet.
Boiled banana florets are smooth, sweet,and refreshing,
making an amazing combinationwith the dipping sauce.
Although Musa banana flowerscome in small quantities,
there's another part of the plantthat comes in quite a large quantity.
It is also widely used in Yunnan.
YUNNAN MANGSHI, MANGLIANG VILLAGE
[narrator] Every morning,
the fishermen of Longchuan River
send freshly caught seafoodto Bao Changjiu.
Anchovies have a very firm texture.
To retain their freshness,another method of cooking is needed.
BAO CHANGJIU
The waxy surface of the Musa banana leavesmakes them easy to separate.
The leaves emit a refreshing fragrance.
Bao Changjiu will use theseto cook the anchovies.
[calm music]
[narrator] To the northwest,some 50 miles away,
is the stockaded village of Palaung.
Surrounded by green mountains,
Zhao Yuyue is searching for an ingredientfor her daughter's wedding banquet.
She needs to be extra cautious
because the priceof obtaining this ingredient
is chopping downan entire Musa banana plant.
[suspenseful music]
[thumps]
[narrator]Then she removes multiple layers,
only to gether daughter's favorite delicacy.
The banana rootstock
is the main nutrient supplyof a banana plant.
Its texture is soft, refreshing,and crunchy...
with a little hint of bittersweet.
Every part of the banana planthas been handled with the utmost care.
This is one way humankind pays respectto Mother Nature
when discovering new culinary ingredients.
The banana leavesneed to be prepared beforehand.
[sizzles]
[calm music]
[narrator] Baking the leavesdehydrates them...
and softens themso that they can make a good wrapper.
[upbeat music]
[narrator] Then ground spices are added,such as peppers and cherry tomatoes
mixed together thoroughly.
Doing this retainsthe anchovies' tenderness.
It also ensures the anchoviesare seasoned evenly.
The anchovies are wrapped up firmlywith three layers of banana leaves.
This flavorful dishis waiting to be served.
[fire crackling]
[narrator] Under heat and pressure,the water slowly seeps out.
The use of the banana leaves
ensures that the dish's fragranceis well-retained.
[calm music]
[narrator] After grilling for 40 minutes,
the anchovies are marinated well
with a strong aroma of spices
and the smell of freshnessfrom the banana leaves.
They are smooth, flavorful, and delicate.
GRILLED WRAPPED RIVER FISH
[light music]
[narrator] Wrapping foodwith banana leaves and grilling it
is known as wrap grilling.
This is similar to grilling and steamingat the same time,
to maintain the complete shape of the foodand retain its aroma.
It's a traditional cooking methodused since the hunting era.
Now, it has become the signatureof Yunnan dishes.
YUNNAN MANGSHI, MANGBANG VILLAGE
[narrator] Some 70 kilometers away,in the stockaded village of Dai,
Yue Baoxian is carefully handlinga soft and delicate banana flower.
A tasty delicacy is yet to be bornin these embers.
[fire crackling]
[calm music]
It takes experience to get the temperatureand grilling time just right.
An hour laterand it's time to check the results.
[rasping]
[light music]
[narrator] The banana flowerhas fully transformed.
Its very essence has been pestleduntil it's ground to a pulp.
Juice has oozed outof the pestled banana flower
adding a nice viscosity.
It is then mixed well with various spices
forming a smooth and exquisite texture.
[light music]
[light music continues]
YUNNAN MANGSHI, OUTSIDE DONGGUA VILLAGE
[narrator] This fine, smooth textureis what Zhao Yuyue is seeking.
ZHAO YUYUE
[boiling water burbling]
[narrator] Boiling for 20 minutes,
the high temperaturehelps tenderize the rootstock,
and, at the same time, removes bitterness.
The next step is crucialin deciding the fate of the dish.
[lively music]
[narrator]The rootstocks are cut into strips
by following their internal pattern.
Making sure that the fibers are intacthelps them season evenly.
The seasoningis Zhao Yuyue's secret weapon.
Grilling elevates the saltinessand the fragrance of fermented soybeans.
This was the most commonly found seasoningin every Palaung household.
Fermented black soybeans.
This is a sweet and tenderbanana rootstock with an intense heat,
thanks to a variety of spices.
It's luscious and juicy
with a slight touchof fermented black soybeans,
bringing excitement to the taste buds.
Tasty.
[cat meows]
[indistinct chatter]
[narrator] The wedding banquetbegins promptly.
According to the customs of Palaung,
the newlywed couple will receive
the blessings of the elderlyas per tradition.
[indistinct chatter]
[narrator] The mother servesthe banana rootstock salad she prepared.
This is her daughter's favorite dish.
Though she may move somewherefaraway after marriage,
this dish's tasteand her memories with family
will keep her connected to them.
[uplifting music]
[narrator]The stockaded village of Palaung
is 1,500 meters above sea level,
and that banana plantZhao Yuyue chopped down
is starting to grow back.
In about eight months' time,it will bear fruit once again.
The vitality of the Musa banana plantis akin to the Yunnan people
whose creativity is strongand everlasting.
[closing theme music]
Subtitle translation by Coleen Chua
