---
title: "Global construction materials database and stock analysis of residential buildings between 1970-2050"
date: 2021-11-03T09:47:42+01:00
categories:
- Research
- Material Flow Analysis
tags:
- material stocks and flows
- buildings
- material intensity
- floor space
keywords:
- tech
thumbnailImage: https://kumarken.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/COVER-JournalCleanerProd_AcceptedMSS_JCLP2.bmp
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: cente
Math: True
---

<!--more-->
$Sylvia Marinova^{a}$; $Sebastiaan Deetman^{a}$;$Ester van der Voet^{a}$; $Vassilis Daioglou^{b,c}$
**a** CML – Institute of Environmental Sciences, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 2, 2333 CC, Leiden, the Netherlands
**b** PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, PO Box 30314, 2500 GH, The Hague, the Netherlands
**c** Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, Utrecht University, Princetonlaan 8a, 3584 CB, Utrecht, the Netherlands

Received 30 January 2019, Revised 25 October 2019, Accepted 2 November 2019, Available online 7 November 2019.

Handling editor: Yutao Wang

{{< toc >}}

# Abstract
Huge material stocks are embedded in the residential built environment. These materials have the potential to be a source of secondary materials, an important consideration for the transition towards a circular economy. Consistent information about such stocks, especially at the global level, is missing. This article attempts to fill part of that gap by {{< hl-text orange>}}compiling a material intensities database for different types of buildings and applying that data in the context of a scenario analysis, linked to the SSP scenarios as implemented in the global climate model IMAGE.{{< /hl-text >}} The database is created **on a global scale**, dividing the world into **26 regions** in compliance with **IMAGE**. The potential use of the database was tested and served as input for {{< hl-text orange>}}modelling the housing and material stock of residential buildings for the period 1970–2050{{< /hl-text >}}, according to specifications made for the **SSP2 scenario**. Six construction materials in four different dwelling types in urban and rural areas are included. The material flows related to those stocks are estimated and analysed in a companion paper (also exploring commercial buildings) by Deetman et al. (2019). The results suggest a significant increase in the material stock in housing towards 2050, particularly in urban areas. The results reflect specific patterns in the material contents across the different building types. China presently dominates developments in the global level building stock. The SSP2 projections show a stock saturation towards 2050 for China. In other regions, such as India and South East Asia, stock growth is presently just taking off and can be expected to become dominant for global developments after 2050. The database is created to be used as input for resource and climate policymaking as well as assessment of environmental impact related to residential buildings and assessment of possibilities for urban mining. In the future, we hope to extend it as new data on materials in the built environment become available.

# 1. Introduction

The demand for primary materials has increased significantly during the last decades, driven by industrialisation and economic development. The demand for raw materials is forecasted to continue growing with the increase in global population and affluence (OECD, 2013), resulting in a growing in-use stock of materials. An important share of these materials is related to residential buildings. The residential building sector accounts for 30–50% of the material consumption, forming a massive material stock which increased during the past years and is expected to expand further (Steger and Bleischwitz, 2011). Demographic changes and increased Gross Domestic Product (GDP) are expected to lead to a growth in the demand for floor area and construction materials respectively (OECD, 2013), both per capita and in an absolute sense. The built environment is associated with considerable environmental impacts related to the construction and operation of buildings, ranging from the extraction and transformation of resources to the increased energy demand of the in-use buildings (Augiseau and Barles, 2017). At the same time, it represents a huge urban mine of valuable raw materials for secondary resource providers. As yet, there is little insight into these stocks. However, knowledge of these stocks and their dynamics is essential information for a transition towards the circular economy (Müller, 2006; Krausmann et al., 2017).

Individual estimations of stocks and flows of building materials on a national and regional level have been performed and described in various studies. However, so far, there is little harmonisation: each of these studies has its focus, uses its data and makes its own methodological choices. {{< hl-text orange>}}Material Flow Analysis (MFA) is the methodology widely used to quantify the materials flows and stocks in the built environment. {{< /hl-text >}}The two main approaches of material stock assessment can be described as **bottom-up** and **top-down** (Auping et al., 2014; Urge-Vorsatz et al., 2012). The top-down approach calculates stocks at the aggregate level, as the result of net-additions-to-stock of a material over a period of time. {{< hl-text orange>}}The bottom-up approach** divides the stock into categories of products or applications and estimates the stock by characterising each of its components with a material intensity ratio (e.g. kg/m2).{{< /hl-text >}}

Over the past years, efforts have been made to explore the dynamics of the stock (Müller, 2006; Olaya et al., 2017; Hashimoto et al., 2007). For instance, Müller (2006) applied stock dynamics modelling to forecast the resource demand simultaneously with the related waste generation. Hu et al. (2010) (Hu et al., 2010) used Müller’s dynamic stock model as a basis for the development of an MFA model which represents the changes in the residential buildings floor area in use in China between 1900 and 2100. A number of studies developed this approach further and explored the material composition of the stock while taking into consideration the generation of construction and demolition waste (Hashimoto et al., 2007; Hu et al., 2010; Reyna and Chester, 2015; Aksoezen et al., 2016), as well as the spatial distribution of the stock (Heeren and Hellweg, 2018; Tanikawa and Hashimoto, 2009; Kleemann et al., 2016; Koutamanis et al., 2018).

Recognising the importance of the environmental implications of material demand, researchers assessed the relationship between the material stock and negative impacts related to the built environment such as energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. The most recent studies employ a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) approach and take into account material and energy flows in addition to emissions related to the life cycle of the building itself (Stephan et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2018; Nemry et al., 2010).

In recent years, a small but growing number of studies has been conducted with the purpose to record, store and analyse information on the {{< hl-text blue>}}material content{{< /hl-text >}} of the built environment. For example, Gontia et al. (2018) (Gontia et al., 2018) developed a {{< hl-text blue>}}material intensities database{{< /hl-text >}} of residential buildings in Sweden. The study explores 46 buildings and separates them according to their building type, construction type and construction period. In addition, Kleemann at al. (2016) (Kleemann et al., 2016) developed a {{< hl-text blue>}}material content database{{< /hl-text >}} in order to investigate the building stock in Vienna, Austria. Another study compiling a material database along with the investigation the total material stock and flows resulted from demolition waste is Miatto et al. (2019) (Miatto et al., 2019), recording detailed information of material intensities of buildings in one city (Padua, Italy). Besides, Heeren at al. (2019) (Heeren and Fishman, 2019) compiled a material intensities database on a global scale by extracting information from 33 studies and recording approximately 300 data points from those studies.

Studies like these recognise the importance of the material stock but address it in individual case studies at various scale levels. On the global scale, the available literature associated with material stocks in the built environment is limited, and lacking in detail. To address this gap, this article aims to summarise the existing knowledge on the residential building stock composition, to integrate it into a global level material content database, and to test the usability of the database by applying it in a global material stocks model for residential buildings. To facilitate using these data for scenario assessments, we do this in relation to the IMAGE (Integrated Model to Assess the Global Environment) Integrated Assessment modelling suite as used by PBL (Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency) for the assessment of global level climate change scenarios (Stehfest et al., 2014a; Doelman et al., 2018; van Vuuren et al., 2017; O’Neill et al., 2017).

This article has the following objectives:

* Review of existing studies using different approaches to identify the material content in residential buildings.
* Compile a database of materials used in the construction of residential buildings at the global level in accordance with the IMAGE regions.
* Test the applicability of the database in a scenario context by modelling the past, present and future material stock in residential buildings based on IMAGE data and the materials database, using a bottom-up approach.

This paper focuses on stocks of materials in residential buildings. In a companion paper (Deetman et al., 2019), we add two pieces of research:
• A stock assessment of materials in various types of commercial buildings
• An assessment of inflows and outflows related to both residential and commercial buildings: the stock of building materials, and waste streams related to demolition.

# 2. Methodology and data

## 2.1. The building stock model
In order to assess the practical applicability of the database, we apply a stock model which aims to determine the in-use stock of construction materials used in the built environment and makes estimations of their future stock. In this paper, we focus on the in-use stock of residential buildings. The starting point for the stock estimations is the total Useful Floor Area (UFA) specified for 26 world regions, as projected by the IMAGE model and described by Daioglou et al. (2012) (Daioglou et al., 2012). Section 2.2 describes this in more detail. The UFA is translated into material stock for the period between 1970 and 2050 by using material intensities per square meter UFA. Similar to Müller’s model (Müller, 2006) the main drivers in the system are population and lifestyle in terms of UFA per capita.

The building stock model distinguishes between urban (including suburbs) and rural areas, as well as different types of residential buildings: detached houses, row houses, apartment buildings and high-rise buildings (Van Beers and Graedel, 2003; Stephan, 2013; Carre and Crossin, 2015). The additional variables that feed the model are the distribution of the population over the different dwelling types, the total UFA per building type for the 26 regions, and the material quantity per building type expressed in terms of kg/m2 UFA.

As mentioned above, the urban/rural distinction is made in the IMAGE-TIMER projections, while the distribution over the different dwelling types is calculated based on national statistics (Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) - Energy Information Administration, 2019; Australian GovernmentAustralian Bureau of Statistics, 2019; Eurostat, 2019). The material intensity is based on the existing literature, reviewed and documented in a material intensities database. The different calculations steps and data sources are discussed in the next section and are illustrated in Fig. 1.
