---
title: "Global greenhouse gas emissions from residential and commercial building materials and mitigation strategies to 2060"
date: 2021-10-29T11:44:15+02:00
categories:
- Research
- Life Cycle Assessment
tags:
- building materials
- mitigation strategies
keywords:
- tech
coverImage: https://structuralengineeringbasics.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/STRUCTURAL-ENGINEERING-MATERIALS.png
coverSize: partial
thumbnailImage: https://seekvectorlogo.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/nature-communications-vector-logo.png
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: center
Math: True
---
Implementing several material efficiency strategies together in a High Efficiency (HE) scenario could almost half the baseline emissions. Yet, even in this scenario, the building material sector would require double its current proportional share of emissions to meet a 1.5 °C-compatible target.
<!--more-->
Xiaoyang Zhong, Mingming Hu, Sebastiaan Deetman, Bernhard Steubing, Hai Xiang Lin, Glenn Aguilar Hernandez, Carina Harpprecht, Chunbo Zhang, Arnold Tukker & Paul Behrens
Nature Communications volume 12, Article number: 6126 (2021)
{{< toc >}}

# Abstract
Building stock growth around the world drives extensive material consumption and environmental impacts. Future impacts will be dependent on the level and rate of socioeconomic development, along with material use and supply strategies. Here we evaluate material-related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions for residential and commercial buildings along with their reduction potentials in 26 global regions by 2060. For a middle-of-the-road baseline scenario, building material-related emissions see an increase of 3.5 to 4.6 Gt CO2eq yr-1 between 2020–2060. Low- and lower-middle-income regions see rapid emission increase from 750 Mt (22% globally) in 2020 and 2.4 Gt (51%) in 2060, while higher-income regions shrink in both absolute and relative terms. Implementing several material efficiency strategies together in a High Efficiency (HE) scenario could almost half the baseline emissions. Yet, even in this scenario, the building material sector would require double its current proportional share of emissions to meet a 1.5 °C-compatible target.

# Introduction

Housing is one of the most immediate basic human needs, along with food and clothing1. The provision of residential and commercial buildings is responsible for over one-third of energy use and energy-related GHG emissions globally2. There are two main ways to mitigate building-related emissions: (1) decarbonize/reduce the energy needed for in-use buildings and (2) decarbonize/reduce the production of materials and energy in construction. Environmental policies have traditionally focused on improving energy efficiency and renewable energies in the use phase while neglecting material efficiency in construction3,4. A policy approach that focuses only on in-use emissions may miss important opportunities in construction5,6. Indeed, there may also be important trade-offs between pre-use and in-use emissions whereby highly energy-efficient buildings may require more materials in construction7,8,9. In 2018, the manufacturing of building materials alone accounted for 11% of global energy- and process-related GHG emissions2, as a result of consuming over half of global concrete and brick10, some 40% steel11, and a large number of other metals and non-metallic minerals12.

Global trends indicate a rapid increase in demand for new buildings in the coming decades. This is mainly driven by growing populations and increasing wealth around the world (especially in Asian and African regions2,13), but also due to a demand for housing upgrades in highly urbanized areas14. As such, large amounts of materials are needed. Building technology has advanced substantially over the past decades. For example, buildings can be built with lower environmental impacts (such as using wood15 or less metal for the same structural properties16), designed for a longer lifespan17, or for a higher post-consumer recycling rate18. However, despite these technological advances, less-efficient building practices are still being widely used, especially in regions that will see most of this demand19,20. These trends pose a critical challenge in reducing GHG emissions from building materials and meeting global climate targets.

Research on the environmental impacts of building materials and mitigation strategies has {{< hl-text orange>}}gained momentum{{< /hl-text >}} only in the past decade. Studies have either focused on residential building materials in a single country17,21,22,23 or represent a certain material type at one time24,25,26. Further, calculating emissions requires consistent scenarios of both materials demand and process emissions intensities6, whereas most studies address just one of these aspects27,28. A recent study29 assessed the climate impacts of materials efficiency strategies on residential buildings in 9 large economies. {{< hl-text orange>}}Though valuable, this study omitted most emerging African and Asian regions (which represent much of the increasing housing demand in the future2,13) as well as the global non-residential buildings.{{< /hl-text >}}

Here we develop ***a global building material emission model*** that integrates ***a dynamic material assessment model*** for estimating future building materials demand, and ***a prospective life cycle assessment (LCA) model*** to estimate emissions from materials production. We include **7 materials** in **4 residential buildings** types and **4 commercial building** types across **26 world regions** (see Methods). We investigate the development of global GHG emissions of residential and commercial building material production. We investigate the impacts of major material efficiency strategies and the implications of these strategies for meeting climate targets (Methods). We find a continuous increase in building material-related GHG emissions on a global level and dramatically different emission trends across world regions. We observe significant emission reduction and material loop closing potentials in the considered material efficiency strategies. We outline important mitigation opportunities and challenges associated with building materials for achieving global climate targets.

# Results
## Scenario narratives
We base our investigation on outputs from IMAGE30,31, a globally integrated assessment model, and the ecoinvent32 life cycle inventory database. Different shared socioeconomic pathways (SSPs)33 are modeled in IMAGE reflecting possible future developments of socioeconomic parameters. We select the “middle-of-the-road” SSP2 pathway34 which expects a moderate population and GDP growth. We use the socioeconomic30,31 and energy transition scenarios35 under IMAGE-SSP2 as inputs for our dynamic building materials model and prospective LCA, respectively. We explore two scenarios for the development of material requirements and emissions to 2060: a Baseline scenario, given by the SSP2-baseline parameters from IMAGE, and a High Efficiency scenario, assuming full implementation of several important materials efficiency strategies drawn from the literature (see Table 1). The time period from now to 2060 is characterized by population rise with income converging across economies30,33, which have dramatic impacts on building construction and material demands. It also gives the industry sufficient time to develop and scale-up technologies for a sustainable transition36. The literature supporting the feasibility of these strategies often provides a target by 2050, not 2060. In such cases, we extrapolate these targets to 2060. Please see Methods the Supplementary Information for full details on the model, data, and scenarios.
