---
title: "Regression Analysis: How Do I Interpret R-squared and Assess the Goodness-of-Fit?"
date: 2021-10-24T12:05:35+02:00
description: "In this post, we’ll explore the R-squared (R2 ) statistic, some of its limitations, and uncover some surprises along the way. For instance, low R-squared values are not always bad and high R-squared values are not always good!"
categories:
- Research
- Statistics
tags:
- regression
- R-squared
- Goodness-of-Fit
keywords:
- tech
thumbnailImage: https://datascience696.files.wordpress.com/2016/08/regressioncurv.png
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: center
Math: True
---
Low R-squared values are not always bad and high R-squared values are not always good!
<!--more-->
After you have fit a linear model using regression analysis, ANOVA (Analysis of variance), or design of experiments (DOE), you need to determine how well the model fits the data. [In this post]https://blog.minitab.com/en/adventures-in-statistics-2/regression-analysis-how-do-i-interpret-r-squared-and-assess-the-goodness-of-fit), we’ll explore the R-squared (R2 ) statistic, some of its limitations, and uncover some surprises along the way. For instance, low R-squared values are not always bad and high R-squared values are not always good!
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
# What is Goodness-of-Fit for a linear model?

Linear regression calculates ***an equation that minimizes the distance between the fitted line and all of the data points***. Technically, ordinary least squares (OLS) regression minimizes the sum of the squared residuals.

In general, a model fits the data well if the **differences** between the observed values and the model's predicted values are **small** and **unbiased**.

Before you look at the statistical measures for goodness-of-fit, you should check the **residual plots** (Definition: Residual = Observed value - Fitted value). Residual plots can reveal unwanted residual patterns that indicate biased results more effectively than numbers. When your residual plots pass muster, you can trust your numerical results and check the goodness-of-fit statistics.

{{< hl-text red >}}Roughly, Goodness-of-Fit indicates the discrepancy between observed values and the values expected under the model in question.{{< /hl-text >}} [^1]


[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodness_of_fit

# What is R-squared?

R-squared is a statistical measure of how close the data are to the fitted regression line. It is also known as the coefficient of determination, or the coefficient of multiple determination for multiple regression.
