---
title: Complexity Economics
date: 2021-10-13T16:05:34+02:00
Describtion:
coverImage: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/Complex_systems_organizational_map.jpg
coverSize: full
thumbnailImage: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/Complex_systems_organizational_map.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: center
tags:
- energy economics
- complexity economics
- complexity science
Categories:
- Research
math: false
---


From **The Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School (INET Oxford)**
https://www.inet.ox.ac.uk/research/programmes/complexity-economics/
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
# keke
djkfjdlkfj

## Overview
A growing number of economists and social scientists view the economy as a **‘complex adaptive system’** - ***a distributed network of dynamically interacting, heterogeneous agents, whose behaviours, strategies and relationships evolve over time***. Under such a view ***the economy is more akin to an ecosystem, the brain, or the internet*** than to the mechanistic models of traditional theory.

{{< alert success >}}
Today I made a delicious meal for my new colleague.
{{< /alert >}}

The Complexity Economics Programme is applying leading-edge tools from **complex systems science** to generate new insights into a wide range of economic problems. The group utilises methods such as **network analysis** and **agent-based computer simulations** to incorporate realistic portrayals of human behaviour and institutions in its models and better understand how {{< hl-text red >}}economic systems evolve{{< /hl-text >}} dynamically over time. This approach enables researchers to {{< hl-text red >}}see how{{< /hl-text >}} macro patterns in the economy, such as financial crises, emerge out of micro level behaviours, interactions, and structures. The group is applying these techniques to issues including financial system stability, innovation, and growth, and is also collaborating with the EEG programme on inequality and employment, and the EoS programme on issues related to sustainable growth.

The group includes scholars from a number of disciplines, including economics, maths, physics, and computer science, and collaborates with the Oxford Martin Programmes on Complexity, Risk and Resilience, Technological and Economic Change and the Post Carbon Transition. The programme is partnered with Oxford’s Mathematical Institute, the Department of Computer Science and the Saïd Business School. The programme’s work has generated significant interest from policymakers. Interactions with policymakers include the Bank of England, European Central Bank, New York Federal Reserve, Deutsche Bundesbank, European Commission, IMF, OECD, UK HM Treasury, UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, US Department of Energy, US Senate, and various policy think tanks in the US and UK.

If you would like to keep up to date with our publications, news and events, please sign up to our mailing list or email complexity@inet.ox.ac.uk for more information.

## djkfjd
jdflkdjfklj

### djkfjdlkfj
jkdfjkdj

## dkjflkdj
jkdfjkdj

### dkjflkdjd
jaklfjdaskl
