---
title: "Urban Material Flow Analysis of Plastics"
date: 2021-12-07T12:02:53+01:00
categories:
- Research
- Material Flow Analysis
tags:
- plastics
keywords:
- tech
thumbnailImage: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/UniversiteitLeidenLogo.svg/1200px-UniversiteitLeidenLogo.svg.png
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
Date: **2020-12-07**
Programme: **Industrial Ecology**
Author: **Bichler, Tobias** (TU Delft Technology, Policy and Management)
Contributor: **Cucurachi, Stefano (mentor)**, Rutten, M.M. (mentor), van Emmerik, Tim (mentor)
<!--more-->
Degree granting institution: Delft University of Technology, Leiden University
{{< toc >}}

# Abstract

* How can the plastic mass balance of an urban area be modelled using Material Flow Analysis?
* Developing a generic framework, which includes eight consumption sectors, three distinguishable littering processes and two subsystems (surface water system and soil)
* A bottom-up approach is applied and the municipality of Leiden in the Netherlands is used as a case study.
* The biggest plastic flows are packaging flows (4146 t), plastics in building waste (1342 t) and plastics in End-of-life transportation systems (570 t). The highest plastic stocks are in buildings (86080 t), transportation (14020 t) and electronics devices (10326 t).

# 2 Theory

## 2.1 Material flow analysis

### 2.1.1 Material flow analysis studies on plastic flows
* Only little research tried to assess plastic flows on the regional level.
* Many analysis lacks stock assessment.
* Joosten et al. (2000) assessed the plastic flows in the Netherlands using a so called STREAM method: the supply and the use analysis & the final consumption analysis. The method translates national “{{< hl-text blue>}}supply and use tables{{< /hl-text >}}” from monetary units into physical units in order to account for the plastic flows on a national level.
{{< alert info >}} Try whether we can find the plastics data in IO tables{{< /alert >}}

## 2.2 Citizen science
* Mobile application [**Litterati**](https://litterati.org/): focusing on land-based litter in the natural and urban environment with geo- and time- tagged plastic pieces (also tags for describing).
* Currently there are around 3082 data entries for the year of 2019 (May 2020) on Litterati for the city of Leiden.
{{< wide-image src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/65668613/145055400-ff52a02e-6149-44ff-8d0c-6f18c085225d.png" title="Figure 2: Documented litter points in the municipality of Leiden, data based on Litterati (2019)." >}}
