---
title: "The role of concrete in life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of US buildings and pavements"
date: 2021-11-16T17:03:34+01:00
categories:
- Research
- Life cycle assessment
tags:
- concrete
- buildings
keywords:
- tech
metaAlignment: left
thumbnailImage: https://archaea.univie.ac.at/fileadmin/_processed_/csm_2020_12_07_pnas_75_7c47843eea.jpg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
Jeremy Gregory, Hessam AzariJafari, Ehsan Vahidi, Fengdi Guo, Franz-Josef Ulm, and Randolph Kirchain
**a** Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139;
**b** Materials Research Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
PNAS September 14, 2021 118 (37) e2021936118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2021936118
Edited by David A. Weitz, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved August 4, 2021 (received for review October 20, 2020)

# Significance

Changes to concrete production as well as in {{< hl-text orange>}}building and pavements systems—the largest consumers of concrete{{< /hl-text >}}—can lead to more than 50% reductions in associated GHG emissions by 2050. Over this period, the operational phase of newly constructed buildings and pavements still generates most GHG emissions unless the electrical grid, heating, and transportation are decarbonized aggressively. Meeting decarbonization targets will require lowering the GHG emissions of concrete production as well as innovative uses to lower building and vehicle fuel consumption. Owing to their low abatement costs, several concrete solutions should be prioritized in climate change policies. More than one-third of the embodied impacts of building and pavement construction can be offset by implementing concrete solutions.

# Keywords

greenhouse gas emissions; buildings; pavements; concrete; life cycle assessment

# Abstract

Concrete is a critical component of deep decarbonization efforts because of both the scale of the industry and because of how its use impacts the building, transportation, and industrial sectors. We use a {{< hl-text blue>}}bottom-up model{{< /hl-text >}} of {{< hl-text blue>}}current and future building and pavement stocks and construction in the United States{{< /hl-text >}} to contextualize the role of concrete in greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions strategies under {{< hl-text blue>}}projected and ambitious scenarios{{< /hl-text >}}, including {{< hl-text blue>}}embodied and use phases{{< /hl-text >}} of the structures’ life cycle. We show that projected improvements in the building sector result in a reduction of 49% of GHG emissions in 2050 relative to 2016 levels, whereas ambitious improvements result in a 57% reduction in 2050, which is 22.5 Gt cumulative saving. The pavements sector shows a larger difference between the two scenarios with a 14% reduction of GHG emissions for projected improvements and a 65% reduction under the ambitious scenario, which is ∼1.35 Gt. This reduction occurs despite the fact that concrete usage in 2050 in the ambitious scenario is over three times that of the projected scenario because of the ways in which concrete lowers use phase emissions. Over 70% of future emissions from new construction are from the use phase.

Concrete is the most extensively used building material in the world because it possesses a unique combination of attributes—strength, versatility, and durability—for a relatively low cost using raw materials found all over the world. It is used in nearly every element of our built environment including buildings, pavements, bridges, and water and energy systems. This ubiquity in infrastructure has also made concrete use tightly linked to achieving societal sustainability goals. Thacker et al. (1) found that infrastructure, which makes extensive use of concrete, either directly or indirectly influences the attainment of every United Nations Sustainable Development Goal.

On a weight-normalized basis, concrete has a lower carbon and energy footprint than nearly all materials used in the built environment (2). Nevertheless, the cement and concrete sectors are deservedly under scrutiny regarding their environmental footprint because of the sheer scale of production (3). Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the production of cement (the primary driver of GHG emissions for concrete) account for a little over 1% of the total US GHG emissions footprint (4). Thus, the challenge of sustainable development is manifest in microcosm in the use of concrete: accomplishing societal goals while minimizing environmental impacts.

There is no question that we need to reduce the emissions associated with cement and concrete production. However, the mitigation solutions for products made with concrete extends beyond the cement and concrete production value chains. Materials dictate the modes of manufacture and constrain the operational performance of the products into which they are fashioned (5). Concrete is a prime example of this phenomenon. Forming the backbone of large, complex, long-lived systems, changes in the use of concrete can positively or negatively impact the in-use performance and GHG emissions of these systems for decades.

In this systems context, we seek to evaluate the {{< hl-text blue>}}cost{{< /hl-text >}} and {{< hl-text blue>}}effectiveness{{< /hl-text >}} of a range of strategies for reducing the GHG footprint of two important systems—buildings and pavements—including both changes in {{< hl-text blue>}}cement and concrete production{{< /hl-text >}} and changes in  {{< hl-text blue>}}system design, maintenance, and operations{{< /hl-text >}}. Using this comprehensive model, we also evaluate the relative contribution of embodied and operational emissions as these systems undergo significant change and explore whether GHG emissions reductions are possible in these systems even if there is increased use of concrete. Mapping these changes for buildings and pavements is challenging, because the impact of system structure is influenced by local context, the role of extant stock and its evolution, and the long timeframe that needs to be considered. {{< hl-text orange>}}To overcome these challenges, we develop and apply spatially and temporally heterogenous, life cycle models of the buildings and pavements systems.{{< /hl-text >}} We limit our analysis to the United States because of the extent of data required for modeling. In the United States, these systems account for over 60% of apparent cement usage according to data from the industry and the building, transportation, and industry sectors account for 90% of all GHG emissions (4). As such, changes in the structural components of these systems can provide influential leverage in meeting climate targets.

# Literature Review

There is an extensive literature on approaches to mitigate the embodied emissions of cement and concrete production (2, 3, 6⇓⇓–9). Most mitigation approaches involve making cement with lower GHG emissions or making concrete with less cement. Concrete GHG emissions can be lowered through the use of cement substitutes such as low-carbon cements [blended cements or alternative cement binders (10)] or supplementary cementitious materials (such as fly ash or granulated blast furnace slag) (3) or through active use of captured carbon to produce synthetic limestone aggregates or cure concrete (11).

{{< hl-text orange>}}While embodied emissions of concrete are important, life cycle assessments of infrastructure systems built using concrete have shown that in most cases they are much smaller than emissions that occur during the use or operational phase of the structure.{{< /hl-text >}} In most buildings, the energy consumption over the building’s life dominates the total life cycle environmental impact, representing 80 to 90% in many cases (12⇓⇓–15). {{< hl-text orange>}}Similarly, in most pavements, the excess fuel consumption in vehicles caused by {{< hl-text blue>}}pavement–vehicle interaction{{< /hl-text >}} (excess energy dissipation due to pavement roughness or deflection) is much larger than the embodied impacts of paving materials.{{< /hl-text >}} Depending on the context (i.e., the traffic and location), {{< hl-text orange>}}roughness and deflection-induced excess fuel consumption contribute 23–78% of the life cycle GHG emissions of pavements (16).{{< /hl-text >}} Including the reflectivity impact of pavements on the climate in the use phase can increase the use phase contribution to ∼90% of the total GHG impacts (17). Thus, the ways in which we design and maintain structures that use concrete can have much larger impacts than the impact of materials. All of these studies have explored existing buildings or pavements operated under conditions that exist today. Significant changes are expected in the carbon intensity of energy used for the operation of buildings and transportation systems. While this is expected to increase the importance of embodied emissions to future mitigation efforts, the literature does not provide quantification of this trend.

Although several studies have evaluated the whole life cycle impacts of pavements (16, 18, 19) and buildings (20, 21), proposed solutions usually fall into a few categories. Analyses of pavement systems focus on material flows (22, 23) or optimizing budgets and treatment schedules to minimize vehicle fuel consumption and the associated life cycle GHG emissions (24, 25). Similarly, building system analyses concentrate on material quantities or energy consumption (26–30). Thus, there is a disconnect between analyses of embodied GHG reductions for concrete that focus on materials and do not put those reductions in the context of the full life cycle for the structures in which they are used, nor the system of buildings and pavements.

We contextualize the role of concrete in greenhouse gas reductions in the US building and pavement sectors. This includes the potential impacts and costs of reducing the embodied impacts of concrete along with changes in the design and maintenance of structures that use concrete throughout their entire life cycle. We explore whether total life cycle emissions can decrease even with increased usage of concrete due to functional requirements or opportunities to lower use phase emissions. To a limited extent, we examine other actions that can be used to lower GHG emissions in US building and pavement systems. This allows us to evaluate concrete GHG reductions in the context of the systems and frame those opportunities based on cost and GHG reduction potential.

The models applied in this work consider {{< hl-text blue>}}geographic heterogeneity{{< /hl-text >}} (at a US state level) in the demographics of the current stock of buildings and pavements, local climate, prevailing construction codes, norms for system maintenance, and, in the case of pavements, available public budgets for infrastructure. Using this information, we identify a range of approaches that can be applied to bring emissions from these systems to less than 50% of current levels and how embodied and operational emissions reductions strategies compare.

# Approach
## System Attributes and Strategies for Scenarios.

Our analysis of building and pavement systems in the United States is based on attributes of those systems (e.g., material or energy use) and strategies that may be used to lower GHG emissions. We estimate GHG reduction potential for the strategies from 2016 to 2050 using two scenarios: projected and ambitious improvements.

**Table 1. Attributes of concrete production and building and pavement systems for projected and ambitious GHG reduction strategies.**
|***Attribute definition***|***Projected improvement scenario***|***Ambitious improvement scenario***|
|:---|:---|:---|
|**Concrete (for both buildings and pavements)**|
|{{< hl-text orange>}}Alternative binders{{< /hl-text >}} |	40% {{< hl-text blue>}}clinker replacement{{< /hl-text >}} by 2050 |50% {{< hl-text blue>}}clinker replacement{{< /hl-text >}} by 2050 |
|{{< hl-text orange>}}Particle packing{{< /hl-text >}}	 |No implementation	 |Improve the {{< hl-text blue>}}binder intensity{{< /hl-text >}} |
|{{< hl-text orange>}}Design optimization{{< /hl-text >}} |No implementation	 |19% reduction in {{< hl-text blue>}}concrete consumption per unit area{{< /hl-text >}}|
|{{< hl-text orange>}}Reuse of concrete elements{{< /hl-text >}}	 |No implementation	 |0.1-m3 {{< hl-text blue>}}reuse per cubic meter concrete{{< /hl-text >}} |
|{{< hl-text orange>}}End-of-life carbon uptake{{< /hl-text >}}	|Base on the alternative binders’ scenario and {{< hl-text blue>}}2-y spreading{{< /hl-text >}}	 |Increasing the  {{< hl-text blue>}}spreading period of 3y{{< /hl-text >}} |
|{{< hl-text orange>}}CCS{{< /hl-text >}}	 |100% of the {{< hl-text blue>}}average tech{{< /hl-text >}} by 2050 |	100% of the {{< hl-text blue>}}best performing tech{{< /hl-text >}} by 2050|
|CCU|No utilization |Use of industrial sources of {{< hl-text blue>}}alkalinity{{< /hl-text >}} (/ˌælkə'linəti/) by 2050|
|Building specific|
|Energy codes (appliances, lighting, HVAC, insulation)	|100% IECC 2015 adoption in 2025.100% energy efficient adoption in 2045|100% IECC 2015 adoption in 2025. 100% energy efficient adoption in 2035|
|Electricity grid|	Grid decarbonization following the US EIA projection until 2050	|Grid decarbonization following the US EIA projection for New York state|
|Pavement specific|
| Asphalt	|35% RAP and 100% WMA by 2050, no implementation of recycled binder	|50% RAP, 100% WMA, 50% GTR, and waste oil by 2050|
|Smoothness	|Equivalent to required budget for keeping surface roughness constant	|20% increase in the currently projected budget|
|Concrete overlay|	Only used in regions where it is already in place	|Inclusion of concrete overlay action for all regions|
|Reflectivity|	Average network aged albedo values: concrete = 0.25; asphalt = 0.1	|Use reflective coating/binder to reach average network albedo = 0.3|
|Stiffness|	Current stiffness values existing in the national road network|	Increase the stiffness to the 95th percentile of the current range|
|Vehicle fuel efficiency|According to the US Energy Outlook forecast|	Same as the projected improvement scenario|
* CCS, carbon capture, sequestration; CCU, carbon capture, utilization; GTR, ground tire rubber; HVAC, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; IECC, International Energy Conservation Code; RAP, recycled asphalt pavements; US EIA, United States Energy Information Administration; WMA, warm mix asphalt. More details are in SI Appendix, Table S1.

Table 1 summarizes the building and pavement system attributes and strategies under the two scenarios. Strategies are framed in terms of technical targets (e.g., percentage of renewables in the grid) and timing of adoption of those targets, which in some instances varies regionally. The “projected improvement scenario” is intended to reflect a future where current trends to improve system attributes will continue. For buildings, this includes continued decarbonization of the electrical grid and increases in energy efficiency requirements in building and appliance codes. These energy efficiency improvements include increased thermal insulation where concrete can play a role. For pavements, this includes continued improvement in vehicle fuel economy. For both systems, the projected improvement scenario evolves toward the use of net zero emissions concrete (portland cement–based and asphalt-based) through the use of lower-carbon constituents (including recycled content), carbon capture in cement production, and use of captured carbon to produce aggregates and cure concrete. The “ambitious improvement scenario” is intended to reflect a future where more aggressive actions to lower GHG emissions are taken. In all cases, ambitious strategies are limited to technologies that exist today, but have not been adopted at meaningful scale. Building ambitious strategies are similar to the projected actions but with earlier timing of adopting technical targets. Pavements ambitious strategies are primarily tied to an increase in funding for pavement maintenance and repair. This increase in funding is important because, unlike buildings, there are few current policies explicitly intended to improve infrastructure GHG emissions. As such, for the projected improvement scenario we assume that there is no change over time in the pavement system’s stiffness, reflectivity, or types of maintenance, rehabilitation, and reconstruction actions (referred to as MRR). The increase in available budget in the pavement ambitious strategy allows for more extensive application of all pavement-related improvements, so there is more of an interdependency among these ambitious strategies. Details on the technical targets and timing of pavement and building sector by region are in SI Appendix, section 2, including SI Appendix, Tables S1 and S2, along with justification for why the strategies and targets were chosen.
