---
title: "Plastic Leak Project -- press release and methodological guidelines"
date: 2021-12-08T10:49:13+01:00
categories:
- Research
- Life Cycle Assessment
tags:
- plastic
keywords:
- tech
coverImage: https://quantis-intl.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/tackling-plastic-pollution-cover.png
coverSize: partial
coverMeta: out
metaAlignment: left
thumbnailImage: https://quantis-intl.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/cover_plp-methodo-guidelines-e1582794363624-1024x688.png
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
**27/02/2020**
The Plastic Leak Project (launched in **2019**), led by ***Quantis*** and ***EA*** in partnership with ***35 public, private and scientific organizations***, has released a methodology to conduct plastic leakage assessments.
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}

# Press Release (02/27/2020)
* About ***Quantis***: A sustainability consulting group.
* About ***EA***: EA is an ecodesign centre based in Switzerland (www.shaping-ea.com), member of the European Network of Ecodesign Centres (ENEC). Founded by **Julien Boucher**, also co-founder of Quantis, EA has developed a unique expertise in the field of marine plastic pollution and plastic footprinting.
* For the **first time**, businesses have a standardized, science-driven way to map, measure and forecast plastic (including microplastic) leakage across their value chains.
* These guidelines empower companies to translate their commitments to tackle plastic pollution into meaningful, metrics-based strategies and actions to reduce plastic leakage and mitigate business risks.
* A powerful methodology for driving meaningful action.

# Methodological Guidelines (05/2020, V1.3)
* Plastics enter the environment by one of two core streams: visible macroplastics mainly from mismanaged waste, and mostly invisible primary microplastics released from various sources, such as synthetic clothing during washing.
* Exposure to an aquatic environment not only degrades macroplastics into
{{< hl-text blue>}}secondary microplastics{{< /hl-text >}}, but also fragments primary microplastics into even smaller particles through {{< hl-text blue>}}photodegradation{{< /hl-text >}} and other {{< hl-text blue>}}weathering processes{{< /hl-text >}}.
* An overview of plastic leakage: 1. {{< hl-text blue>}}Coastal mismanaged (macro) plastic waste (MPW){{< /hl-text >}}: 8 Mt/year (people living within 50 km of shore across 192 countries). 2. {{< hl-text blue>}}Inland mismanaged (macro) plastic waste{{< /hl-text >}}: 1 Mt/year. 3. {{< hl-text blue>}}Microplastics{{< /hl-text >}}: 1.5 Mt/year of plastic enters the marine environment in the form of primary microplastics (abrasion of synthetic textiles during washing (35%) and the erosion of tires while driving (28%)).

{{< wide-image src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/65668613/145369462-09097fbf-7375-4ab4-9053-408be695b174.png" title="Figure 1.2: Plastic production and plastic leakage by source: current best estimates worldwide (Boucher et al. 2019b)" >}}
