---
title: "Collection: LCA of plastic or packaging waste"
date: 2021-12-14T11:17:02+01:00
categories:
- Research
- Life Cycle Assessment
tags:
- plastic
- packaging
thumbnailImage: https://www.mdpi.com/sustainability/sustainability-13-05340/article_deploy/html/images/sustainability-13-05340-g002.png
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---

<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
# [Life cycle assessment of end-of-life treatments of waste plastics in China](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092134491930117X?via%3Dihub)

Yuedong Chen $^a$, Zhaojie Cui $^a$, Xiaowei Cui $^b$, Wei Liu $^a$, Xinlei Wang $^a$, XinXin Li $^a$, Shouxiu Li $^a$
$^a$ **School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shandong University,** Qingdao 266237, China
$^b$ **School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,** Shanghai 200240, China

Received 28 December 2018, Revised 8 March 2019, Accepted 8 March 2019, Available online 6 April 2019.

## Highlights
* Environmental impacts of {{< hl-text blue>}}EOL treatments{{< /hl-text >}} were assessed based on the components and treatment pattern of waste plastics.
* EOL treatments of waste plastics bring environmental benefits to China.
* **Mechanical recycling** plays the most beneficial role in EOL treatments.
* Scenarios are set to analyze the potential reduction of environmental impacts for waste plastics.

## Abstract

# [Achieving net-zero greenhouse gas emission plastics by a circular carbon economy](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abg9853)
Research article from ***Science***
**30 Sep 2021**
RAOUL MEYS $^{1,2}$, ARNE KÄTELHÖN $^{1,2}$, MARVIN BACHMANN $^1$, BENEDIKT WINTER $^{1,3}$, CHRISTIAN ZIBUNAS $^1$, SANGWON SUH $^4$, ANDRÉ BARDOW $^{1,3,5}$

$^1$ Institute for Technical Thermodynamics, RWTH Aachen University, Schinkelstr. 8, 52062 Aachen, Germany.
$^2$ Carbon Minds GmbH, 50933 Cologne, Germany.
$^3$ Energy and Process Systems Engineering, ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland.
$^4$ Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
$^5$ Institute of Energy and Climate Research–Energy Systems Engineering (IEK-10), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.

## Abstract

*  Implementation of circular technologies in the plastics supply chain: {{< hl-text orange>}}(i) chemical and mechanical recycling, (ii) biomass utilization, and (iii) carbon capture and utilization (CCU)—to exchange the fossil carbon feedstock{{< /hl-text >}}.
* Our study shows that by combining recycling, biomass utilization, and CCU, net-zero GHG emission plastics could be achieved with lower energy demands and lower operational costs than those associated with current fossil-based production technologies combined with carbon capture and storage (CCS).
* We built and used a global bottom-up model for plastics production and waste treatment based on {{< hl-text blue>}}>400, mostly industrially validated, life-cycle assessment compliant and harmonized technology datasets{{< /hl-text >}} representing the life cycle of >90% of global plastics.
* We project five pathways for life-cycle GHG emissions of plastic from “cradle-to-grave” in the year 2050.
* Two scenarios for fossil-based plastic waste treatment: landfilling and energy recovery.
