---
title: "The impact of covid-19 on global plastics waste trade flow"
date: 2022-01-31T11:56:42+01:00
categories:
- Plastic
- COVID-19
thumbnailImage: https://www.aljazeera.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/d8af2feae1fd430887cde0389b6b92e8_6.jpeg
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
# The challenges of Covid-19 pandemic on improving plastic waste recycling rates
[*Sustainable Production and Consumption*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352550921002001)
Received 9 April 2021, Available online **6 July 2021**.
Norman Ebner
Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QY, United Kingdom

1. The impact of Covid-19
* The surge in medical waste:  face masks and plastic gloves
* The boom in online shopping and food-takeaway: packaging
* The set-back on the bans on single-use plastics
2. System dynamics
Fig. 1. Casual loop diagram depicting the dynamics between oil price, plastics production and plastic waste recycling industries.

# Minimising the present and future plastic waste, energy and environmental footprints related to COVID-19
[*Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032120301763#bib29)
Jiří JaromírKlemeša
Sustainable Process Integration Laboratory – SPIL, NETME Centre, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Brno University of Technology - VUT Brno, Technická 2896/2, 616 69, Brno, Czech Republic
Received 15 April 2020, Available online **27 April 2020**

## 1. The composition of increasing plastic demand during the covid-19
[](https://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S1364032120301763-gr3_lrg.jpg)
The plastic demand in the medical sector to help in combating the COVID-19 including the face shield (PP), gown (LDPE), vinyl gloves (PVC), disposable bag, tube, masks (plastic sheet and non-woven fabric) etc. (from WHO)

> Changes on the waste amount and composition trigger a structure change in **waste management system**

The relationship between MSW and plastics waste: treatment capacity change, waste change(decreased solid waste, increased packaging from deliveries and hospital)
> The amount of waste threatens to overwhelm existing treatment and disposal facilities, posing the risk of secondary contagion from improper waste management.

## 2. New challenges in waste management
> The source of contaminated waste is not limited to hospitals. Patients with mild symptoms self-isolated at home generate contaminated MSW. This requires a substantial structural change in waste management, from the sorting rules, collection, waste treatment to the safety protocol of the waste collection workers.

* Food containers in Germany, which would normally be classified as recyclable waste, now have to be treated as hazardous waste if there is a risk of contamination with pathogens.

* These precautions stimulates the use of plastic, the generation of mixed waste, and the logistic challenges for waste management systems.

>Incineration and steam sterilisation (90 min, 120 °C) are the common pathways for thermal treatment of hazardous medical waste.

> The main challenge is that COVID-19 is creating a waste surge that can exceed treatment capacity by a large margin. Whether to utilise the MSW incineration capacity for medical waste in this critical situation remains an open question. **In Spain, it is stated that if necessary, cement plants can co-incinerate waste upon request [24].** **Norway allows a temporary change in landfill permits and permits to carry waste elsewhere to cope with the medical waste surge [24], if necessary.**

{{< alert info >}} Environmental impact of the structural change of waste treatments during the pandemic{{< /alert >}}


## 3. Scenarios for the future
* Disaster waste management: treatment approaches, infrastructure, capacity (scalability), mobilised/automated (e.g. remote-controlled robots) treatment and collection design, logistics, safety, and regulatory aspects link to the bio disaster response.
* Incorporation of social factors and uncertainties
* Better trade-offs between medical/healthcare plastics and regular single-use plastics

# The COVID-19 Pandemic and the Problem of Plastic Waste in the EU
[*European Research Studies Journal*](https://wir.ue.wroc.pl/info/article/UEWR77ac0d8e27144c26a00e97d4927fa38f/Publication+%E2%80%93+The+COVID-19+Pandemic+and+the+Problem+of+Plastic+Waste++in+the+EU+%E2%80%93+Wroclaw+University+of+Economics+and+Business)
Submitted 22/07/21, accepted **10/09/21**
Bernadeta Baran
Wroclaw University of Economics and Business, Poland

New challenges brought by Covid-19:
1. Extra pressure Leads to inappropriate management strategies, including mobile incineration, direct landfills, and local burnings;
2. Recycling industry was brought to a temporary halt by lockdowns
3. A surge of single-use plastic products (mostly non-recyclable), followed by a growth of municipal solid waste.

# Waste recycling policies and Covid-19 pandemic in an E-DSGE model
