---
title: "UN Comtrade Database"
date: 2022-01-18T09:32:42+01:00
categories:
- Research
- Database
keywords:
- tech
thumbnailImage: https://www.insper.edu.br/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/UN_Comtrade.png
thumbnailImagePosition: left
metaAlignment: left
Math: True
---
<!--more-->
{{< toc >}}
## Plastic waste search codes
[Get data](https://comtrade.un.org/data/)
HS (as reported) commodity codes:
3915 - Waste, parings and scrap. of plastics
391510 - Ethylene polymers; waste, parings and scrap
391520 - Styrene polymers; waste, parings and scrap
391530 - Vinyl chloride polymers; waste, parings and scrap
391590 - Plastics n.e.s in headings no.3915; waste, parings and scarp
## Data of Taiwan ("Other Asia, nes")
https://unstats.un.org/wiki/display/comtrade/Taiwan%2C+Province+of+China+Trade+data
Taiwan, Province of China Trade data
Created by Vysaul Nyirongo, last modified by Ana Mendoza on May 11, 2021

Q: I did not find **Taiwan** trade flow in COMTRADE database. Would it be possible for me to obtain the Taiwan import and export to these partner Hong Kong and Mainland China data from COMTRADE ?

A: For political reasons, the UN is not allowed to show trade statistics referring to Taiwan, Province of China. Yes, in the partner breakdown, Taiwan, Province of China, is included under "Other Asia, not elsewhere specified" (code 490). Data for "Other Asia, nes" is available only to international organizations. {{< hl-text orange>}}In principle, trade data for territories belonging to Asia, but not specified by country, could end up in code 490.{{< /hl-text >}}{{< hl-text blue>}} In practice, only trade of Taiwan, Province of China is included under this code, except for several countries (such as Saudi Arabia, which report all of their exports to unknown countries).{{< /hl-text >}} Trade data for Taiwan, Province of China are not included within China's trade.

https://unstats.un.org/wiki/display/comtrade/World+Trade+Flows%3A+1962-2000
> Note in particular that the NBER-UN country code for Taiwan is ‘454900’.  This code corresponds to the UN country code of  ‘458960’ and the UN country description of  ‘Asia Othr. NS’, so we are imputing Taiwan trade from that classified as ‘Asia other not specified’ by the United Nations

## FOB value vs CIF value

[Methodology Guide for UN Comtrade User on  UN Comtrade Upgrade 2019](https://comtrade.un.org/data/MethodologyGuideforComtradePlus.pdf)
**Box 2 . Implementation of CIF FOB Values in UN Comtrade Data Interface**
At the most basic data record, up to in three trade values could be presented according to following rules:
a) {{< hl-text blue>}}CIF value for imports{{< /hl-text >}} would be assigned to “CIF Value”.
b) When FOB value is reported for imports, it would be allocated to “FOB Value”.
c) {{< hl-text blue>}}FOB value for exports{{< /hl-text >}} would be allocated to “FOB Value”.
For users ’ convenience, a third (“primary”) trade value is generated by applying IMTS 2010 recommendation on valuation: if available CIF otherwise FOB for imports; FOB for exports, respectively.

https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/stats/documents/ece/ces/ge.20/2020/mtg1/4.1_Globalization_TT_UNECE_valuation2020.pdf
 * System of National Accounts 2008 (2008 SNA) recommends recording of imports and exports of goods at FOB value[^fob].
 * the FOB valuation seems to not be fully reconciled with the general conceptual principle of recording output at basic prices[^ba]:
  - FOB valuation principle : goods are valued excluding freight and insurance services between the exporting and importing countries (i.e., at a point of uniform valuation).
  - basic price valuation principle : goods are valued at the **{{< hl-text blue>}}observed transaction price{{< /hl-text >}}** receivable by the producer (freight and insurance services are included or excluded depending on if these services are separately invoiced by the producer).
* Imports of goods are to be recorded in the supply and use tables at basic prices:
 - CIF to FOB adjustment is needed, if FOBtype data detailed by product group are not available for imports.

Balance of Payments and Int. Inv. Position Manual 6th ed. (BPM6)
* recommends recording of imports and exports of goods at FOB value:
 - principle for valuation of general merchandise: market value of goods, at the point of uniform valuation, that is at the customs frontier of the economy from which the goods are first exported (FOB).
 - allows for partitioning and rerouting of transactions when transaction prices (as agreed between exporters and importers) include varying amounts of distribution costs.  
* use International Merchandise Trade Statistics (IMTS)[^imts] as main data source for goods:
 - IMTS use a CIF type valuation for imports.
 - to derive FOB values, it is necessary to exclude freight and insurance costs incurred between the customs frontier of the exporter and the customs frontier of the importer.
 - CIF to FOB adjustment should be obtained at a detailed level, and CIF to FOB ratios change over time.

For detailed examples of CIF to FOB adjustments and implications, see this pdf by [The United Nations Statistics Division](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/aeg/2020/M14_4_2_Import_Export_Valuation.pdf).


[^fob]: The abbreviation CIF stands for "cost, insurance and freight," and FOB means "free on board."
[^ba]: [The basic price](https://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=189) is the amount receivable by the producer from the purchaser for a unit of a good or service produced as output {{< hl-text orange>}}minus any tax payable, and plus any subsidy receivable{{< /hl-text >}}, on that unit as a consequence of its production or sale; {{< hl-text orange>}}it excludes any transport charges invoiced separately by the producer{{< /hl-text >}}.
[^imts]: Trade Statistics Branch of UN Statistics Division is responsible for the development and maintenance of the methodological guidelines on IMTS, including the Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) and related correspondence tables. As part of this work several surveys of national practices have been conducted.
