---
title: Weather
date: 2021-07-17T15:05:14+02:00
description:
images:
- https://www.iamexpat.nl/sites/default/files/styles/ogimage_thumb/public/weather-netherlands.jpg?itok=gqGYf0a1
thumbnail: https://www.iamexpat.nl/sites/default/files/styles/ogimage_thumb/public/weather-netherlands.jpg?itok=gqGYf0a1
tags:
- collocations
- weather
Categories:
- Daily English
---

## Cards

It's great here. Have had **unbroken sunshine** ever since we arrived. We're having a wonderful time-though in the middle of the day it's just too scorching hot to do anything but lie on the beach soaking up the sunshine. This is the life!

It's been pouring with rain all day. In fact I've never seen such torrential rain! It's freezing cold in the tent-we all got soaked. Every half hour we look out of the tent hoping for a break in the clouds. In vain! We're going to a hotel next year!

It rained heavily all day yesterday but it's dry at the moment. There's thick cloud, though, and it certainly looks like rain. Quite a strong wind is blowing too! Am glad we brought warm clothes!
## Weather conditions

The weather is likely to deteriorate later on today.

There is ***thick fog*** on the motorway.
There are ***pathes of fog*** on the east coast but these should lift by midday.
> Patches of fog/mist are small areas of fog/mist, whereas a blanket of fog/mist is thicker and more extensive.

Avoid going on the beach at midday when the sun is strongest.

Road conditions are difficult because of the driving rain.
> driving rain = rain falling fast and heavily.

The ***snow*** is ***lovely and crisp*** this morning.
> crisp snow = snow that is fresh and hard.

There will be a ***hard frost*** tonight.
> opposite of a hard frost = a light frost (NOT a soft frost)

The ***wind*** was ***light*** this morning but it's ***picking up*** now and will be very strong by the evening. The wind was ***whistling*** through the trees.
> biting winds = very cold winds If the wind picks up, it gets stronger.

## Extreme Weather

Freak stroms devastate SW

Yesterday ***freak weather conditions hit*** the south-west of England. ***Gale-force winds*** caused a lot of damage to property. A number of buildings were destroyed, ***roofs were torn off*** and ***fences were blown down***. Several rivers ***burst their banks***.

## Exercises

13.1
1. crisp snow
2. patches of mist/fog
3. strong winds
4. a biting wind
5. a hard frost
6. torrential rain
7. unbroken sunshine/cloud
8. a blanket of fog/mist/snow

13.2
1. There was a light wind yesterday.
opp: strong
2. The wind picked up in the evening.
opp: **died down**
3. The weather is likely to improve tomorrow.
opp: deteriorate/**get worse**
4. It was scorching hot here yesterday.
freezing cold
5. There may be some light rain later on today.
heavy/driving rain
6. This mist came down at about midday.
lifted

Either listen to the weather forecast on an English-language TV or radio channel or go to the website www.bbc.co.uk/weather. (You can enter the name of your own country to get information about the weather there.)

## From BBC London Weather

This evening, plenty of sunshine is expected. Overnight, it will be generally clear but a few fog or mist patches may **move in** toward dawn.

Monday looks to be slightly cooler, with sunshine, but also patchy cloud and the chance of a **few showers** in the afternoon. A few of the showers could be heavy and thundery.

Tonight, it is set to be dry with clear spells for a time, but an area of cloud will **drift in** from the west, and it will become cloudy later on. Mist or fog patches may develop towards dawn.

Tomorrow morning will see mist or fog patches clear early, then a few sunny spells will develop. Any patches of **lingering cloud** should clear for the afternoon leaving plenty of sunshine.

High pressure will remain in control into next week. Tuesday looks to be another day with plenty of sunshine, but also **a few patches of cloud** is possible at times. Wednesday will continue sunny and dry too, with just some patchy high cloud possible. A similar story is expected for Thursday, with plenty of sunshine and just some passing high clouds possible at times.
