---
title: What is the specific of Czech beer?
date: 2021-06-26T21:50:46+02:00
description: Why Czech beer is it so unique, and why is it not produced elsewhere?
images:
- https://libreshot.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/bottles-beer.jpg
thumbnail: https://libreshot.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/bottles-beer.jpg
tags:
- Food
Categories:
- Daily English
---

Czech beer is world renowned brand. Why is it so unique, and why is it not produced elsewhere? Answer:Czech raw materials, specific manufacturing process and original technology of Czech breweries.
<br>{{< gfont font= Pattaya size=20 >}}
History of Czech beer is tied to Pilsner and to a work of Bavarian brewmaster Josef Groll.
{{< gfont >}} <br>
The cornerstone of Czech beer is raw materials for its production. Although water, malt, hops and brewer's yeast are available in many other countries around the world, but not enough for making beer that tastes identical with the drink produced in the Czech Republic. This specific properties of materials are currently tied with the Czech environment. Hundreds of years of selctive breeding of cereals and hops, a unique strain of brewer's yeast, soil compositon, climate, water chemistry, but also a way of growing, havesting and preparation of rew materials, all have a major impact on elsewhere unique characteristics of a typical Czech beer, a pale lager Pilsner type.
<br>{{< gfont font= Pattaya size=20 >}}
The unique techology of Czech breweries
{{< gfont >}}<br>
In addition to the raw materials, the technology has significant effect to the final sensory properties of beer (color, taste, zest, foaming, clarity and smell). This can be divided into manufacturing equipment (brewery) and the technological process of beer production.
