---
title: Alternative words and humour
date: 2021-06-12T22:25:16+02:00
images:
- https://www.stratoscale.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/bigstock-Taking-decisions-for-the-futur-168083693-1-e1501669681220-1024x511.jpg
thumbnail: https://www.stratoscale.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/bigstock-Taking-decisions-for-the-futur-168083693-1-e1501669681220-1024x511.jpg
tags:
- Lucy
Categories:
- daily English
---

Some alternatives for please, sorry, fine, sad, tired and bored.

## Alternatives for please
* Would you mind...
* I'd appreciate it if you could...
* Would you be able to ...
* I wonder if you might...

## Alernatives for sorry

* It was thoughtless of me...
* It was careless of me...
* I owe you a pology for my awful behaviour.
* I take full responsibility for my actions.
* I sincerely apologise.

## For I'm fine
* (I) couldn't be better!
* Could be better...
* I've been worse!(in the middle)
* Not too bad, thanks.
* I am doing well, thanks.

## For I'm sad
* I'm gutted.(British slang, very sad and disappointed)
* I'm absolutely devastated.(so sad and so disappointed)
* I'm feeling really down.
* I'm not doing so good.
* I'm a bit down in the dumps.(very sad and without much interest in life )

## For I'm tired
* I'm absolutely exhausted.
* I'm worn out.
* I'm completely knackered.(/ˈnækəd/ British slang)
* I'm completely drained.

## For bored
* I'm bored to death!/to tears!
* It's like watching paint dry!
* I'm bored stiff!
* This is a bit of a snore.

## British humour for fun
1. Irony

  Oh the irony! Oh how ironic!
  Our local fire station burnt down last night.
  The marriage counsellor was divorced with her hasband.
  Oh the irony! Oh how ironic!
2. Sarcasm

  I'm being sarcastic. That was sarcasm.
3. Dead pan/dry humour
4. Witty

  Witty comments
5. Self-deprecation
6. Innuendo/double enterdres
7. Banter
