---
title: "Special issue of Euro 2020: England vs Italy"
date: 2021-07-12T09:24:55+02:00
description:
images:
- https://images.hindustantimes.com/img/2021/07/11/1600x900/Italy_Euro_2020_trophy_1626042203830_1626042228590.jpg
thumbnail: https://images.hindustantimes.com/img/2021/07/11/1600x900/Italy_Euro_2020_trophy_1626042203830_1626042228590.jpg
tags:
- football
- Euro
Categories:
- Daily English
---
### Live blogs

Minute 1: 

### After the final

The UK prime minister and the Football Association have condemned racist abuse aimed at England's Jadon Sancho, Marcus Rashford and Bukayo Saka after the Euro 2020 final defeat by Italy.

All three players missed penalties in the 3-2 shootout loss and were targeted on social media after the game.

"This England team deserve to be lauded as heroes, not racially abused on social media. Those responsible for this appalling abuse should be ashamed of themselves." PM said.

> We made some history, but couldn't achieve the one thing we're all dreaming of.
But football is about more than trophies, and we've seen that all summer.
—twitter of England

> I'm disappointed like everyone else is, football can be a cruel, cruel game at times and I've been on the end of it.
Unfortunately these boys will feel so hurt, so angry so disappointed this morning and it will hurt them for a while.
but when you look at the whole picture they should feel proud of what they have given us because they have given us hope, put smiles on our faces and pulled a lot of people together over the past month.
—Alan shearer, former England captain

> England's Euros dream is dashed in penalty shootout.
— Yorkshire Post

> Italy's veteran defenders Leonardo Bonucci and Giorgio Chiellini – who have a combined age of 70 – are waking up European champions.
— twitter of Italy

> It all ends in tears.
— Daily Mail

> Why are we happy with losing? We were negative after 3 minutes and never got their old central defence. This was ours to lose and should never have gone to penalty lottery.
— ZX
