---
title: Have/Get/Make/Let—Learn when to use causative verbs.
date: 2021-07-03T09:52:27+02:00
description: The English verbs let, make, have, get are called causative verbs because they cause something else to happen.
images:
- https://media.proprofs.com/images/QM/user_images/2503852/New%20Project%20(40)(104).jpg
thumbnail: https://media.proprofs.com/images/QM/user_images/2503852/New%20Project%20(40)(104).jpg
tags:
- Arnel
- verb
Categories:
- Daily English
---

### LET = Permit Something To Happen

I don’t let my kids watch violent movies.
Mary’s father won’t let her adopt a puppy because he’s allergic to dogs.
Our boss doesn’t let us eat lunch at our desks; we have to eat in the cafeteria.
Oops! I wasn’t paying attention while cooking, and I let the food burn.
Don’t let the advertising expenses surpass $1000.

### MAKE = Force Or Require Someone To Take An Action

My ex-boyfriend loved sci-fi and made me watch every episode of his favorite show.
The teacher made all the students rewrite their papers, because the first drafts were not acceptable.

### HAVE = Give Someone Else The Responsibility To Do Something

Grammatical structure:
* HAVE + PERSON + VERB (base form)
* HAVE + THING + PAST PARTICIPLE OF VERB

I’ll have my assistant call you to reschedule the appointment.
The businessman had his secretary make copies of the report.

I’m going to have my hair cut tomorrow.
We’re having our house painted this weekend.
Bob had his teeth whitened; his smile looks great!
My washing machine is broken; I need to have it repaired.

### GET = Convince/Encourage Someone To Do Something

How can we get all the employees to arrive on time?
My husband hates housework; I can never get him to wash the dishes!
I was nervous about eating sushi, but my brother got me to try it at a Japanese restaurant.
The non-profit got a professional photographer to take photos at the event for free.
