---
title: "Renewable Energy: Physics, Engineering, Environmental Impacts, Economics and Planning"
date: 2021-07-25T10:38:36+02:00
description: Fifth Edition by Bent Sorenson
images:
- https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/61lVDLu0YYL.jpg
thumbnail: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/61lVDLu0YYL.jpg
tags:
- energy
- Paul
- renewable energy
Categories:
- Research
---

* Within this economically managed part of the energy sector, renewable energy sources currently provide about **25%** of the energy supplied.

* A large part of this renewable energy is in the form of **biomass energy**, either in food crops or in managed forestry providing wood for industrial purposes or for incineration[^in].

* There are two ways to harness solar energy. **Passive systems** are structures whose design, placement, or materials optimize the use of heat or light directly from the sun. **Active systems** have devices to convert the sun’s energy into a more usable form, such as hot water or electricity[^ele].

* The photovoltaic market enjoys substantial public start-up subsidies (often in the form of subsidized customer investments or attractive buy-back rates for excess solar power).

* Scenario studies are meant to assist the decision-making process by describing a given energy system in its social context, in a way suitable for assessing systems not yet implemented.
> chapter 6 — Energy System Planning

* Economic modelling cannot prove its validity not only because the uncertainty of a long-term observation but also the rules of governing society.

* Econometric methods could include such non-linear behaviour by replacing the input-output coefficients with more complex functions.

* The non-linear, non-predictable relations that may prevail in the future.

* Generally, in a democratic society, the more radically a scenario differs from present conditions, the larger the support it requires among the population.







[^in]: Firewood used for heat and cooking in poor countries or for mood-setting fireplaces in affluent countries, residue and waste burning in combined power and heat plants or incinerators.
[^ele]: (https://www.eesi.org/topics/solar/description). Installing south facing windows, planting shade trees and using Trombe walls, etc.
