---
title: Spatially-explicit footprints of agricultural commodities Mapping carbon emissions embodied in Brazil's soy exports
date: 2021-07-06T17:08:59+02:00
description: Quantifying the carbon footprint of Brazilian soy exports over the period 2010–2015 based on individual traded flows.
images:
- https://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S0959378019308623-gr1.jpg
thumbnailImage:  https://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S0959378019308623-gr1.jpg
tags:
- agriculture   
- LCA
- supply chain
- deforestation
Categories:
- Research
---

### Abstract

* LCA faces limitations when it comes to addressing spatial and temporal variability in production, transportation and manufacturing systems.
* By the integration of LCA principles with enhanced physical trade flow analysis.
* Estimating the carbon footprint[^1] of Brazilian soy exports over the period 2010–2015 based on over 90000 individual traded flows of beans, oil and protein cake from the municipality of origin through international markets.
* A large spatial variability in co2 across sourcing areas, importers and sub-stages has been detected.
* Total GHG emissions from Brazilian soy exports in 2010–2015 are estimated at 223.46 Mt, of which half were imported by China.

### Introduction

* A comparison of EE-MRIO and LCA:
  * Resource and emission footprints can be estimated at the sectoral or national level by using Environmentally-Extended EE-MRIO [^2]) models, at different levels of product detail.
  * LCA is a suitable methodology to quantify environmental impacts of products or processes from 'cradle to grave'.
  * The level of detail in the underlying resource and emission inventories however restricts the scope of application to a limited umber of scenarios, which represents steady-state "average" conditions. This is why LCA results are usually context-dependent and have a low spatial and temporal resolution.
*







[^1]: Tones of carbon dioxide equivalents per tonne of product.
[^2]: EE-MRIO: Environmentally-Extended Multi-Regional Input-Output models.
