---
title: Advanced Course on LCA —— Session 3: Economic Allocation
date: 2021-08-16T16:13:31+02:00
description:
images:
- https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/65668613/129578026-ec0940d3-30b7-4b94-82b2-366cf33db933.png
thumbnail: https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/65668613/129578026-ec0940d3-30b7-4b94-82b2-366cf33db933.png
tags:
- LCA
- CML
- Jeroen
Categories:
- Research
---

## Session 3
## Purpose

This software session focuses on reproducing the results of an LCA paper on economic allocation, defining functional flows and identifying multi functional processes, with the software program CMLCA. In today’s exercises, you will learn:

* to understand the main principles of economic allocation;
* how such analyses work in CMLCA software.

You may perform the exercise alone or together with (a) colleague(s) in a virtual room, and again, you don’t have to hand in the results.

## Data and Software

The software is CMLCA, which you already have installed on your computer.

## Exercise 3.1

Along with this exercise a copy of the paper “Guinée J.B., Heijungs R., Huppes G. (2004). Economic Allocation: Examples and Derived Decision Tree. Int. J. LCA 9 (1), 23-33” has been provided to you (see your “Reading materials”). Please read pages 23-27 (till the end of the page) of this paper.

## Exercise 3.2

Now we will reproduce the calculations made in this paper with CMLCA.
a) Open CMLCA and start new LCA project, and press OK. Press F11, select and select Scientist as user skill.

b) Implement the first allocation case described in section 3.2 (pp. 26-27) by adding/inserting the processes “primary aluminium production”, “extrusion to engine”, “use”, “collection & dismantling”, “secondary aluminium production” and “production of other semiproducts” with their data on economic (products) and environmental flows (extensions):
Note:
• When inserting the process and data for “use”, “used engine” is not a
good in this example, but a “waste”.
• The reference flow is just a product out of the process “use” and is
inserted into CMLCA as an economic flow with unit “yr” and value “5”.
c) The last window of this exercise of inserting process data should look like the window
below:
