---
title:
date: 2021-09-06T09:27:15+02:00
description:
images:
-
thumbnail:
tags:
- policy
- CBAM
- carbon leaking
- IOA
- competitiveness
Categories:
- Research
---
Pages Posted: 24 Jul 2021 Last revised: 30 Aug 2021
Jiarui Zhong
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg
Jiansuo Pei
Renmin University of China - School of Applied Economics
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3891356

## Abstract

Curbing climate change is gaining increasing consensus globally. While many countries seek to set carbon prices, significant **price dispersion** and **policy stringency** continue to raise concerns about competitiveness. To address this issue, the EU has proposed a **carbon border adjustment mechanism (CBAM)**, which aims to level the playing field by levying a carbon price on EU imports. Theoretically, this mechanism would reduce the competitiveness of developing countries' exports and, therefore, shift the environmental burden from developed regions to the emerging world. In this paper, we estimate the competitiveness and welfare impacts of the EU CBAM, based on the so-called multi-regional input-output approach. We quantify changes in the value of exports to the EU market upon CBAM implementation for both EU members and non-EU countries, plus the rest of the world. It is found that the EU CBAM will lead to a redistribution of competitiveness among countries and regions, while the effect is seen to be more pronounced in emissions-intensive and trade-intensive sectors. Moreover, a deeper sub-national-level analysis on China shows that, given its pervasive domestic production network, income losses in landlocked provinces exceed their export losses, contrasting with the pattern for trade-exposed provinces.

## Introduction

To counteract carbon leakage and the potential loss in competitiveness and to incentivize other countries to participate in combating climate change, the European Commission suggested the EU CBAM, which will levy carbon tariff on imports.

In theory, a CBAM is regarded as being effective in reducing carbon leakage and the negative impact
on competitiveness induced by unilateral climate policies.

Such an outcome would violate the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change’s (UNFCCC) principle of **Common but Differentiated Responsibilities (CBDR)**.

## Data and model

International Supply Use Tables (SUTs) from the World Input-Output Database (**WIOD**);
Chinese multi-regional input-output（CMRIO）tables;
China's customs data;
Parameters from the GTAP database.

### Constructing the product-by-product CMRIO-WIOT of **2012**.

Using **a set of SUTs** to construct a product-by-product WIOT from **WIOD**.
Using **standard RAS method** to balance the blocks with the **non-negative entries**.
Using **cross-entropy (CE) matrix** balancing method constructed in Lemelin (2009) instead of the Generalized RAS (GRAS) algorithm, which Chen et al. (2019) applied (CE performs better when zero and negative entries exist due to the least information loss).
> [A reference of RAS](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cros/system/files/Macro-Integration-03-M-RAS%20v1.0.pdf)

The derived product-by-product WIOT contains **43 countries** and a block for the **rest of the world**,
each of which has **56 product sectors**.

Embedding product-by-product CMRIO into the above-generated WIOT.



prepared fonts:
Bangers Pattaya Kalam
Oswald  Roboto

{{</* figure src="" width="" height="" class= "big/left/right/(空)" caption="Leiden bike (800×500，class is left)" */>}}

{{</* gfont font="" size="px" */>}}
Pattaya is a city in Thailand.<br>A beach resort popular with tourists.
{{</* /gfont */>}} <br>
