---
title: Distributional impacts of carbon pricing in developing Asia
date: 2021-09-24T11:11:07+02:00
description:
images:
- https://convergentbsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/nature_sustainability_logo_2_0-2.png
thumbnail: https://convergentbsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/nature_sustainability_logo_2_0-2.png
tags:
- nature
- carbon pricing
- Hauke
Categories:
- Research
math: false
---
## Distributional impacts of carbon pricing in developing Asia
Jan C. Steckel, Ira I. Dorband, Lorenzo Montrone, Hauke Ward, Leonard Missbach, Fabian Hafner, Michael Jakob & Sebastian Renner
Nature Sustainability (2021)
Published: 23 September 2021
Mercator Research Institute on Global Commons and Climate Change, Berlin, Germany
Department Economics of Climate Change, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany

## Abstract

Understanding who would be affected in which way by carbon pricing is pivotal for effective and socially equitable policy design, addressing climate change and reducing inequality. This paper focuses on **eight key countries in developing Asia (Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey and Vietnam)**. By combining **national household surveys with input–output data**, we compare the distributional effects of **four carbon pricing design options**, including a **globally** harmonized carbon price, a **national** carbon price and **sectoral** carbon prices in the **power and transport sectors**, respectively. Our analysis reveals a substantial degree of variation regarding who would be affected across policy designs and countries. Looking into ***national carbon pricing as the most favourable policy option*** from an economic point of view, we find that ***differences in distributional outcomes are generally more pronounced within income groups than across income groups***. These differences are mainly driven by **households’ energy use patterns**, which vary across countries. Equally recycling revenues back to all citizens would overcompensate the burden of a carbon price for the poorest households in all countries.

## Main

To achieve the Paris goals, climate policies will increasingly need to be implemented in low- and middle-income countries. A growing number of countries consider carbon pricing as a means to achieve their emissions targets, including in Asia. The region is important with respect to global climate mitigation efforts as its high energy demand growth has mainly been fuelled by carbon-intensive coal in recent years. Across the globe, >500 GW of coal power is currently under construction or planned, most of it (>89%), located in developing Asia. Once built the planned coal capacity would seriously jeopardize the Paris climate targets. Even though it is too early to know how COVID-19 will affect further investment plans, investments in coal can be expected to continue if recovery packages are not increasingly targeted at green investments.

Economy-wide carbon pricing is generally seen as the economically most efficient policy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. A sufficiently high carbon price would substantially reduce incentives to invest in new coal-fired power plants and could make clean forms of electricity generation, such as renewables, economically competitive. Public support for carbon pricing depends on its distributional effect, that is which parts of the population are affected in which way by the policy. Therefore, policies that directly increase the prices of fossil fuels can be contentious, as demonstrated by protests in France in late 2018 (after an increase of carbon taxes on fuels) as well as in Ecuador in late 2019 (following proposals by the government to cut fossil fuel subsidies).

In this paper, we contribute to the understanding of distributional implications of carbon pricing in eight Asian countries which are among those that currently invest most heavily in coal, namely Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey and Vietnam. They host 16% of the current global coal capacity and 37% of the global coal pipeline (73% of the pipeline outside China); that is, what is currently under construction and planned (Extended Data Table 1). It is hence highly unlikely that international climate policy will succeed without those countries undertaking efforts to reduce their emissions and avoid future lock-ins.

At the same time, these countries face substantial challenges to promote human development objectives in line with the agenda of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Some previous studies have analysed the relationship between **climate change mitigation (SDG13)** and socio-economic development, in particular **energy access (SDG7)** and the health benefits of reducing ambient air pollution due to fossil fuel combustion (SDG3). Our study, by contrast, focuses on the **distribution of income (SDG10)** in a cross-country perspective on the basis of detailed accounts of ***household carbon footprints derived on the basis of a unified methodology***. ***It hence differs from previous studies that have either looked at individual countries or used a cross-country approach based on highly aggregated data***. Some comparable analyses have been undertaken for Latin America as well as the EU but to our knowledge not for Asia. ***Our paper extends the geographical coverage and provides a detailed analysis of horizontal equity and the distributional effect of different approaches to carbon pricing that were hitherto restricted to single-country studies***.

Our analyses answer three questions. First, we compare the distributional impacts of different design options for carbon pricing, including an international harmonized carbon price, national economy-wide carbon pricing as well as sectoral carbon prices that only apply to the electricity or transport sector, respectively. Second, we compare the vertical and horizontal distributional effects (across and within income groups) of a national carbon price of US$40 per tCO2 (which is regarded as the lower bound required to achieve the targets of the Paris Agreement). Note that we focus on a national carbon price as the most efficient option from an economic theory point of view. Third, we analyse why the distributional incidences of national carbon prices differ across countries as a result of differences in spending patterns for different consumption categories.

There is a large literature on distributional implications of climate- and energy-policies across income groups, using different methods and datasets (see Ohlendorf et al.[^ohlen] for a review). Previous studies have, for instance, assessed the distributional impacts of fuel taxes18, fossil fuel subsidy reform19 and carbon pricing12 from a cross-country perspective. Recent literature has also taken into account ‘horizontal’ distributional effects within income groups15,16. Our paper provides a cross-country, cross-instrument analysis with highly detailed and representative household data that examines distributional implications across as well as within income groups and sheds light on underlying drivers of variation.

To understand how different household types would be impacted, we perform microsimulations on the basis of representative household survey data and multiregional input–output (MRIO) data. Survey data are collected from the countries’ statistical agencies, harmonized and matched with an environmentally extended MRIO model (Methods and Supplementary Information provide details). Combining both datasets allows us to identify the carbon footprint of households. To assess the distributional impacts of a carbon price, we derive the additional expenditure they would require to maintain their initial consumption. Throughout this analysis we proxy household income by expenditures20,21. Our analysis accounts for the effects of higher costs for direct energy use as well as rising prices for goods and services that use energy as inputs in their production (Supplementary Fig. 10 gives a decomposition of those effects). Despite some methodological limitations regarding the matching of household surveys to MRIO data and issues related to data availability, our results appear to be robust under a broad set of alternative specifications (Supplementary Information).

[^ohlen]: [Distributional Impacts of Carbon Pricing: A Meta-Analysis](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10640-020-00521-1)
