---
title: CBAM needs universal adoption of methods for measuring carbon intensity
date: 2021-10-12T10:55:53+02:00
description:
images:
- https://energypost.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/word-image-4.png
thumbnail: https://energypost.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/word-image-4.png
tags:
- energy intensity
- CBAM
- energypost.eu
Categories:
- Research
math: false
---

August 31, 2021 by Dolf Gielen, Massamba Thioye and Francisco Boshell Leave a Comment.

Europe needs to account for the emissions of imported goods. That cannot happen without the **international agreement on standards and certification systems** for the carbon intensity of all steps in the value chain for all relevant products. Dolf Gielen and Francisco Boshell at IRENA and Massamba Thioye at the UNFCCC explain that several such systems exist around the world, but they need to be harmonised and widely adopted to truly reflect what is happening. It is a matter of urgency, as growing international trade must go hand in hand with the deep decarbonisation of energy intensive industries (think iron, steel, aluminium, chemicals and petrochemicals, building materials including cement, lime, glass, bricks, tiles). Following the European Commission’s proposal for a **Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM)**, the authors summarise the issues and make their recommendations. They cover existing mechanisms like Renewable Energy Certificates, Power Purchase Agreements, GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard, Clean Development Mechanism as well as new accounting systems for green gases, and the role digitalisation can play.

### The CBAM rationale according to the European Commission

The European Union (EU) has established **a target of 55% greenhouse gas reduction by 2030** and **net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050**. Today’s emissions are dominated by energy related CO2.

Figure 1: European GHG emissions, 2018. Notes: Energy industries: Emissions from fuel combustion and to a certain extent fugitive emissions from energy industries, for example in public electricity, heat production and petroleum refining. Fuel combustion by users (excl. transport): Emissions from fuel combustion by manufacturing industries and construction and small scale fuel combustion, for example, space heating and hot water production for households, commercial buildings, agriculture and forestry. Transport: Emissions from fuel combustion of domestic and international aviation, road transport, railways and domestic navigation. Agriculture: This includes among others, emissions from livestock-centric fermentation – greenhouse gases that are produced when animals digest their food, emissions from manure management and emissions from agricultural soils. Industrial processes: Emissions occurring from chemical reactions during the production of e.g.: cement, glass etc. Data including international aviation, excluding indirect CO2 emissions and land use, land use change and forestry. / Source: Based on EUROSTAT http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=env_air_gge&lang=en

The effort required going forward is much more important than the previous target of a **20% reduction in 2020**, compared to **1990 levels** (an objective that was already reached in 2018). It implies a much-accelerated emissions reduction in the coming decades.

Such emissions reduction can only be achieved if all sectors are considered.

### Energy intensive industries
This includes energy intensive industries. These industries are a source of direct emissions, but they also consume significant amounts of electricity and heat, and they are a source of process emissions (Figure 1). Part of those industries are **iron and steel making, aluminium making, the chemical and petrochemical industry, and ceramic materials production including cement, lime, glass, bricks and tiles**.

The EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) CO2 price is currently around **50 Euros per tonne of CO2**. Having to buy such emission permits can significantly increase the production cost for some sectors. ***If importers in these sectors do not face the same carbon cost, this can distort competition, reduce competitiveness and increase imports***. ***As a result, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions could increase elsewhere, so-called carbon leakage, wiping out the GHG mitigation effort in Europe***.

To manage that risk of carbon leakage, exposed industries have been so far ***granted free allowances and compensations*** for the increase in electricity costs under state aid rules as part of the EU ETS. However, free allocation under the EU scheme weakens the price signal that the system provides for the installations receiving it compared to full auctioning.

### Phasing out free allocations
The European Commission has presented a proposal for a Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) ***as a means to progressively remove the free allocation while addressing the risk of carbon leakage***. Indeed, the impact assessment of the proposal concluded that **a 10-year phasing in period starting in 2026**, during which the free allocations of allowances under the EU ETS would be gradually phased out by **10 percentage points each year** and the CBAM would be phased in, provides clear benefits relative to all other options considered in the proposal.

This policy option ensures a high level of effectiveness for the CBAM and it is expected to add compatibility with World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules. Indeed, free allocation to industry has been identified by some experts as a possible issue for the compatibility of the scheme with WTO. The use of the revenues from the levy has also been identified by some experts as another issue of compatibility with WTO. ***An UNCTAD report published on 14 July concluded: The CBAM could help avoid “carbon leakage”, but its impact on climate change would be limited – only a 0.1% drop in global CO2 emissions – with higher trade costs for developing countries.***

### The CBAM carbon accounting concept
The European Commission has published a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the council establishing a carbon border adjustment mechanism. According to that proposal, ***CBAM will initially be applied for cement, electricity, fertilisers, iron and steel, and aluminium and will require importers to buy CBAM certificates that are priced at the same level as ETS certificates***. The number of certificates that need to be bought will depend on the **volume** and the **carbon intensity** of the imports. Hence, the need for a calculation method for carbon intensity of products.

For a company operating in a specific value-chain, its GHG emissions can be split into **scope 1** (**direct emissions from the production processes it owns or controls**), **scope 2** (**indirect emissions related to electricity and heat provision**) and **scope 3** emissions (**all indirect emissions not included in scope 2 that occur in the value chain of the company, including both upstream and downstream emissions**).

CBAM specifies that for electricity imported in the EU, default values shall be determined based on either specific default values for a third country, group of third countries or region within a third country, or ***if those values are not available, on EU default values for similar electricity production in the EU***. Where no specific default value has been determined for a third country, a group of third countries, or a region within a third country, the default value to be used for the determination of embodied CO2 in imported electricity is the EU CO2 emission factor, which is **the EU average CO2 intensity of electricity produced with fossil fuels**.

The alternative is to opt for actual emissions for the electricity exported to the EU. If a declarant has a power purchase agreement (PPA) with an electricity producer in a third country, the emission intensity of the delivered electricity can be applied. That CO2 intensity can be applied for the amount generated through the PPA, but for any additional electricity exported to the EU by the declarant, the default applies.

Recycling is not specifically mentioned. The energy and CO2 intensity of recycled aluminium and steel is much lower than for primary material produced from natural resources. Producers in Europe and abroad may opt to use more scrap feedstock to meet the requirements. This represents a potential loophole if only Europe applies such carbon accounting practices for energy-intensive materials and scrap can be imported for recycling, which would reduce the CO2 emissions embedded in Europe’s consumption but increase the carbon footprint of products consumed elsewhere.
