---
title: Land use indicators in LCA
date: 2021-08-10T09:54:21+02:00
description:
images:
-
thumbnail:
tags:
- land use
- LCA
- research proposal
Categories:
- Research
---

## Principles for life cycle inventories of land use on a global scale

Thomas Koellner, Laura de Baan, Tabea Beck, Miguel Brandão, Barbara Civit, Mark Goedkoop, Manuele Margni, Llorenç Milà i Canals, Ruedi Müller-Wenk, Bo Weidema & Bastian Wittstock
The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment volume 18, pages1203–1215 (2013)
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11367-012-0392-0

### Land use elementary flows

In LCA, land occupation and land transformation can be distinguished as basic types of land use elementary flows (Milà i Canals et al. 2007). They result in either damage to or benefits for ecosystem quality. Whereas **land transformation causes a change in ecosystem quality, land occupation delays recovery**. For example, the conversion of tropical forest into cropland causes a drop in biodiversity and damages the original ecosystem. The continuous use of such cropland hinders the regrowth of tropical forest. In order to assess the impact of such land uses, it is necessary to at least register in the LCI the type of land use, the spatial extent, the temporal extent, and the geographical location (Milà i Canals et al. 2007). In LCIs, the elementary flows of land use are therefore specified as follows:

* For land occupation: square meter × years, land use type i, and region k

* For land transformation: square meter, initial land use type i → final land use type j, and region k

Human activities do not only alter the terrestrial but also the aquatic surface. Some processes imply the occupation or transformation of water surface (e.g., building a street on top of a river) or the bottom of water bodies (e.g., fish trawling). Mila i Canals et al. (2007) define **“physical changes in the seabed”** as land use-related impacts and distinguish between occupation and transformation impacts. ***The use of aquatic surface can cause environmental impacts and should be listed in LCIs as this is done in Ecoinvent (Frischknecht and Jungbluth 2007).*** In the following, we therefore also discuss the classification of surface use on top of or under water bodies. For simplicity, ***we use the term “land use” to express the use of terrestrial as well as aquatic surface***.
