---
title: Literature review on land use of future energy
date: 2021-08-09T11:26:59+02:00
description:
images:
-
thumbnail:
tags:
- land use
- LCA
- research proposal
Categories:
- Research
---

## Land use and electricity generation: A life-cycle analysis

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
Volume 13, Issues 6–7, August–September 2009, Pages 1465-1474

Vasilis Fthenakis¹, Hyung Chul Kim²
¹ National Photovoltaic Environmental Research Center, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Bldg 475B, Upton, NY 11973, United States
² Center for Life Cycle Analysis, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, United States

### Abstract
Renewable-energy sources often are regarded as dispersed and difficult to collect, thus requiring substantial land resources in comparison to conventional energy sources. In this review, we present the **normalized land requirements** during the life cycles of conventional- and renewable-energy options, covering **coal, natural gas, nuclear, hydroelectric, photovoltaics, wind, and biomass**. We compared the land transformation and occupation matrices within a life-cycle framework across those fuel cycles. Although the estimates vary with regional and technological conditions, **the photovoltaic (PV)** cycle requires the least amount of land among renewable-energy options, while the **biomass cycle** requires the **largest amount**. Moreover, we determined that, in most cases, **ground-mount PV systems** in **areas of high insolation** transform **less land** than the **coal-fuel cycle** coupled with surface mining. In terms of land occupation, the **biomass-fuel cycle** requires the **greatest** amount, followed by the **nuclear-fuel cycle**. Although not detailed in this review, conventional electricity-generation technologies also pose secondary effects on land use, including contamination and disruptions of the ecosystems of adjacent lands, and land disruptions by fuel-cycle-related accidents.

Keywords
Land occupation; Transformation; Renewable; Photovoltaics; Coal; Biomass; Wind; Nuclear

### 1. Introduction
The potential role of renewable-energy sources, such as solar electric and wind power, is becoming increasingly important as they offer numerous advantages over non-renewable, conventional energy sources in terms of environmental health and safety. Still, **critics often charge that renewable-energy sources require large amounts of land compared to conventional energy-generation options**; hence, deem them inadequate to resolve the foreseeable crisis of climate change. Our review revealed quite contrasting results on this topic from various sources, and that the number and scope of such sources were limited. Gagnon et al. [1], estimated land use as **45 km2/TWh** for the **photovoltaic (PV)-fuel cycle** compared to **4 km2/TWh**[^TWh] for the **coal-fuel cycle**; however, ***they did not include in the latter surface mining and indirect land use by underground mining***. Further, the International Energy Agency (IEA) [2], and Pimentel et al. [3] reported that the former requires 7–17 times more land than the latter to produce unit of electricity per year. Other life-cycle-based land assessments [4], [5], including Ecoinvent, a major commercial database [6], and a study commissioned by the U.S. Department of Energy [7] gave contrasting figures, namely, that conventional energy sources, such as coal and natural gas, require comparable amounts of land as does PV throughout their life cycles.

Admittedly, the scarcity of data and the different metrics employed in each study add more complexity to discerning actual land use in different fuel cycles. A variety of land-use metrics were devised to support environmental impact assessment, risk analysis, and policy decision-making. The life cycle assessment (LCA) for a process- and product-level appraisal commonly measures “life-cycle land use” via metrics that are parsed into land transformation (unit: m2), and land occupation (unit: m2 × year). The former indicates the area of land altered from a reference state, while the latter denotes the area of land occupied and the duration of the occupation. Incorporating static- or dynamic-land quality information into these metrics resolves the impact of the full life cycle from land use [8]. Current information is considered too incomplete to accurately describe the potential for ecosystem damage or land-quality indicators of the specific type of land use [8], [9], [10].

We review in this study the life-cycle land use for renewable-fuel cycles, i.e., wind, photovoltaic, hydroelectric geothermal, and biomass, and for conventional fuel cycles, i.e., coal, nuclear, and natural gas. It is based on our analyses of the literature and actual data. Our assessment of land use employs land transformation and occupation metrics, thus accounting for both direct- and indirect-usages. For the latter, which is linked with materials and energy use, we employed the Ecoinvent database that includes land transformation and occupation factors associated with their usage [6]. Finally, we added a comparative analysis for energy options in terms of the metrics examined.

2. Land transformation
2.1. Coal
The coal-fuel cycle affects the pattern of land use both directly and indirectly during the stages of mining, beneficiation, and electricity-generation. Coal mining transforms the existing landscape, destroys the soil, and removes ground vegetation, all direct effects of land use. Furthermore, the usage of materials and the energy for operating coal mines and building infrastructures requires additional land during the upstream processes—indirect land use. Further, there are secondary land disturbances (not quantified in this study) that are due to pollutants and effluents from the coal-fuel cycle, such as water contamination, land acidification, and deterioration of forests. They are caused primarily by acid or alkaline drainage, dust, and soil erosion from coal mines, and by pollutant emissions from coal power plants.

2.1.1. Direct land transformation
Table 1 presents the land area transformed during coal mining, and the conditions assumed for this estimation. The size of land transformed varies with factors, including the coal’s heating value, seam thickness, density, and the mining method. Disturbed areas are related reciprocally to the seam’s thickness, particularly in surface mining. In the U.S., about 70% of coal is mined at the surface [11], stripping mountaintops and changing contours. The comparable amount of land for underground mining is undetermined, although the surface area disturbed is smaller than in surface mining. The major concern in underground operations centers on land subsidence or slumping around coal-bearing fragile lands, including roads, dwellings, and national forests [12]. Land is required for many facilities in operating a coal power plant, including a powerhouse, switchyard, stacks, precipitators, walkways, coal storage, and cooling towers. A 1000 MW plant in the U.S. requires between 330 and 1000 acres [13] that translates into 6–18 m2/GWh of transformed land based on a capacity factor of 0.85. Furthermore, a coal-fired power plant in this country generates during its operation a significant amount of ash and sludge. Disposing of the solid wastes accounts for 2–11 m2/GWh [13]. Summarily, we estimate 6–33 m2/GWh of land transformation for the entire operation (Table 2).

[^TWh]: 10¹², TW⋅h, terawatt-hour, /terə/
{{</* figure src="" width="" height="" class= "big/left/right/(空)" caption="Leiden bike (800×500，class is left)" */>}}
