---
title: "Assessing the spatially explicit global footprints of European net-zero strategies "
date: 2021-06-02T10:11:09+02:00
images:
- https://www.healio.com/~/media/slack-news/stock-images/endocrinology/r/research-files-adobe.jpeg
thumbnail: https://www.healio.com/~/media/slack-news/stock-images/endocrinology/r/research-files-adobe.jpeg
tags:
- research proposal
- mrio
Categories:
- research
---

*“Someone’s sitting in the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago” ---Warren Buffett.*

## Research aim
1. Building a detailed, spatially explicit, internationally trade linked **GMRIO of food and energy systems** at a **~5arc min(9km)** resolution.
2. Exploring **current environmental and social footprints** of these systems and the **threats or opportunities presented by EU net-zero strategies**.
3. Incorporating net-zero pathways from the literature into the model from both production and consumption perspectives, and connecting land suitability maps for future renewable energy, mining, and agriculture potentials.
4. Using **projected water and food yield maps** to identify important issues and opportunities for net-zero strategies.

## Cause and effect

1. To avoid environmental damage, the food and energy systems urgently need transition. EU net-zero strategies(including but not limited to): consumption shifts(transition to nationally recommended diets, plant-based diets, reduced consumer waste, and closing yield gaps) and co2 removal.
> About "[closing the yield gaps](https://wad.jrc.ec.europa.eu/yieldsgaps)" given by European Commission.

2. Proposed net-zero strategies will have enormous impacts across nations and continents as EU engages in larger net-imports of resources and emissions than any other continents.

3. Local conditions are key to identifying net-zero trade-offs and opportunities
  * large changes in land use like land sparing/sharing, biodiversity preservation and synergistic renewable energy development aligned with other net-zero targets
  * Natural climate solutions and carbon sequestration opportunities in the sparing land. Land and mining requirements for renewable energy.)

4. Therefore we need a high-spatial resolution and a supply-chain integrated model to fully assess EU net-zero strategies and pathways.
  * Disadvantages of current land-use models:  
    a coarse resolution at ~25arcmin (45km);
    limited number of regions;
    omit socioeconomic factors (focusing overwhelmingly on price optimization);
    not connected to international supply chains.
  *  GMRIOs can trace teleconnection(environmental and social impacts) international supply chains, but they are available at a national level only and with limited product detail in food systems.
  * Already some work done on spatially explicit approaches for liking supply chains and physical national IOTs with a high product resolution.
  > Papers:<br>
  > [Brazilian soy and SEI-PCS model](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921800915000427#!).<br>
  > [The Construction of the Food and Agriculture Biomass Input–Output Model](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.9b03554).<br>
  > [Building global physical input-output tables in a virtual laboratory](https://epub.wu.ac.at/7949/1/WP_36.pdf).

5. Finally we will go beyond this by building a spatially explicit, trade-linked global toolbox and use it to assess environmental and social footprints of EU net-zero strategies to 2050.

## Working packages

WP1：Assessing spatially explicit **production-based** footprints of food and energy systems.
* A set of globally consistent geographical information databases.
* Food system: 5-arc-minutes biomass maps: crop, animal and forestry databases (e.g. cropland for fodder, human consumption and biofuels).
* Energy system: mining for fossil fuels and renewables, refinement
 and varying resolutions for the energy system.

> Refining:　A petroleum refinery is a processing plant that converts crude oil into a mix of different finished petroleum products.<br>
> Energy transmission is the most basic function of global energy interconnection. Electric energy transmission is an important mode of energy transport, with the flow of electricity generated from coal as well as hydro, nuclear, wind, and solar energy all transmitted through power grids. <br>


The need for a high spatial resolution and supply-chain integrated model to fully assess EU net-zero strategies and pathways.
>[regions of high inequality](https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2019/637951/EPRS_BRI(2019)637951_EN.pdf): regions where the people have a relatively lower income than other regions.


About "[closing the yield gaps](https://wad.jrc.ec.europa.eu/yieldsgaps)" given by European Commission.
Currently, a coarse resolution at ~25acrmin. ---> we want to build a 5arcmin one.
